Italy's daily Civil Protection press conference at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jDMjt5K-USQ on April 14




(Borrelli) Good evening, thanks to our LIS interpreter, and Prof. Massimo Antonelli, director of emergency at Policlinico Gemelli. And also Prof. Guidi, we've been friends for a long time and it's important to talk about disability during the time of coronavirus.
Today's bulletin: 104291 currently positive, +675
Pressure on hospitals keeps going down: 3186 are in ICU, -74, and 28011 hospitalized, -12
Most patients are self-isolating at home, that's 73094 (70%).
+602 deaths today.
+1695 recovered.
We have 10598 volunteers today.
[I think that's much less than in the past days!]
[Missed some other numbers, my memory for numbers is horrible]
We now have 122.5 million euro in donations. These will be used for purchasing PPEs and ventilators, and we spent 26 million so far.
About the Alan Curdi ship, and migrants in general and their quarantine: I nominated the prefect of Bari to handle this, and he is working to find solutions both for quarantines on ships and finding other places on land.
News that came out on the press on using a specific ship are not accurate as it's still under discussion and not decided.
(Antonelli) Good evening. ICU numbers have definitely improved, and thanks to cooperation with Lombardy, we could do a comparison I'm going to describe: in Lombardy has here been about 65% survival on ICU patients; in Latium, the numbers are lower, and in a similar timeframe we've had just 424 patients, but survival is still exatly 65%.
What does that mean? First, the impact from the Lombard emergency on ICU was strong, and containment measures have allowed mitigation to be more effective in other regions, reducing the ICU number. But it also tells us that the severity is similar, so much that the severity index and the mortality are comparable in two regions with completely different impact.
We can conclude that containment measures work and work well to reduce an impact in individual regions, and resources are enough to face things; secondly, effectiveness of ICU treatment, which are mainly supportive, is relatively high, if we consider how serious these patients are.
(Borrelli) Any questions?




Q: [Elderly/disabled person is speaking] The Civil Protection is Italy's pulsating heart. As a former neurologist at Gemelli, I'd call you the brain cortex of Italy. You are value. You give without asking, and that's what our future has to be. It's called democracy. Sorry for my breath but age and these masks make it hard. I wanted to ask Brusaferro why during the past years the epidemiology service has been cancelled, which could have intervened early and on the whole national territory. Some of the people who were in these press conferences have had strong responsibilities in causing this, we'll have to talk about it later. I think politicians, science, and mass media especially, have forgotten to call things with their name. It's no use talking about "vulnerable" people: there are 7 million people with disabilities, an enormous constellation with great potential, they are not liability but a resource. 
Some have learning problems, some neurological, some have autism, some find it hard to move... so there are many solutions to find: they can no longer be in rehabilitation centers, and home assistance is difficult, and they also cannot take part in school and work because they need specialized assistance that's no longer present.
[I'm kind of losing track of what he's saying now]
But really, let's call things with their names, as an important part of our society is expecting concrete answers.
A: (Borrelli) Thank you... We haven't talked in a while, but you know disability is something we've always kept in mind in the Civil Protection, they are the first people we need to be concerned with during emergency. You know in our department we've had a project for at least 13 years, we have disabled people who work with us who allowed to create a path to follow on disability. Our volunteer organizations are focused on disabled people. As an emergency system, I can assure you that I've taken personal care of some specific cases, like the other night when I've called a mayor about a specific structure hosting disabled people that was having difficulties. I can assure you we'll always be there for disabled people. On the rest of what you said, Prof. Brusaferro will be able to answer tomorrow in the press conference he'll hold tomorrow at ISS.
Q: ICUs are going down in a clear way. Could it also be a signal of lesser virulence of this virus? Hospitalized people are also going down. And Dr Borrelli, today you met the "task force" of economists with the scientific committee... have you talked about re-opening some shops, relaxing the lockdowns in a controlled way...?
A: From an intensivologist point of view, I'd say severity of patients has remained the same. It's hard to say if there's a reduction in virulence, but I don't think so. I think the main role has been played by containment measures.
(Borrelli) The task force is working hard, but I cannot say anything on what we discussed today. It would not be appropriate: the task force will do its job and then only its president can decide when to communicate the results to the PM and the government.
Q: The President of the EU Commission said elderly people will have to stay at home until the rest of the year, which made many people sad. Do you agree with the assessment?
A: When we talk about the elderly we are in fact talking about the most vulnerable part of the population, and they are the people who pay the highest toll in our ICUs, so we definitely need to protect them further... now, making it compulsory for them to stay at home until the end of the year, who can say right now? We need to see how the situation evolves.
Q: What stage are we at with home assistance? Exports had told us that after hospital pressure went down, it would be important to assist patients at home, especially in sight of "phase 2" when work will resume. How will this be handled, including for working people with disabilities?
A: We have a plan on reinforcing "territorial medicine". We're in a phase where synergy that must exist between hospitals and the territory is the key for protecting this portion of the population in the future.
Q: Would you recommend for or against booking summer holidays? (Borrelli) It's a legitimate question! Q: And just in case, maybe holiday activities restricted in the region of residence?
A: (Antonelli) In all honesty I think no one knows. Any answer with any real detail would not be reliable.
Q: We have the scientific committee... how many people, 20, 30, 40? (Borrelli) It depends on the subject, it varies. Q: When we read the decree about the task force, we see they must first communicate with the scientific committee, then with the government. My question is, sometimes we've thought, among all these committee, who decides in the end? Please don't tell me "the government". We want to know dates, timeframes, what the regions want to do, EU guidelines...? And a second question: the 7 million disabled people, there are a lot of people with chronic disease, and they are abandoned now. They are sent home, they cannot be treated as there is no assistance at home, they are unwanted in hospitals... what is the scientific committee thinking wrt these people?
A: I think this pandemic showed, on a worldwide level, that we need an answer touching on various aspects of our lives: not just healthcare, but also operations (Civil Protection, etc) but also a social and economic part... I think the choice by the Government to nominate this committee was right, because it lets the deciders (and you must let me say this, this is not an emergency where I can decide, or some Commissioner... it's about essential interest of 
our society, that must be decided at the top level, so, in the government, with coordination with the regions).
So... I'll say again, the committee will provide its contribution within the timeframe needed for the government to decide further. I'm sorry to answer this way, but it is just this way: only our Council of Minister can take these decisions.
(Antonelli) If I may add... in modern medicine, aside from specific competences, multi-disciplinary abilities are important. In this emergency that's very important. Then about your question, I'd say the problem is even wider: this emergency affected not just disabled people or people with chronic disease, but also, for instance, cancer patients, who are waiting for surgeries and cannot have them... so both centrally and regionally, many hospitals... [journalist interjecting] let me finish please... I mean something else, I mean the regions have oriented towards a choice of "COVID hospitals". Why? Because it lets them concentrate, with cautiousness, the people hit by this disease, and in turn that allows de-congesting the other hospitals, which right now are too crowded and cannot effectively treat both the COVID patients and many other patients. They cannot keep up. So that's one strategy that was put in place to provide an answer and start a process to go back to some "normality".
And in the meanwhile, yes? [Journalist speaking, unintelligible] Yes, sure, but this is something that is happening all over the world: the objective difficulties pose new problems, and make it so that some people, unfortunately, are scared to go to hospitals, or for other reasons, they just cannot receive the assistance they used to get. But we're all working together on this, and at least in some areas we're seeing some answers.
Q: A question to Prof. Antonelli as a member of the scientific committee: clearly, what indications did it give to the government on re-opening activities? If companies can guarantee safety, the committee's opinion is to re-open, or not?
Have we also considered prioritizing tests for healthcare workers and also relatives that are taking care of disabled people? If the person loses that assistance, they can no longer get it. So why have we not tested this category of people? It's about the life of their assisted, too.
A: As a scientific committee member I can only tell you that it's a complex job and the members who are in the committee did determine a profile to be applied. It is currently in a final phase of elaboration, and my colleagues will give you an answer later.
For the test, it's one of the things that could be done, but requesting tests is very complex, as it concerns such a great amount of people that it sometimes has to be viewed practically.
Q: So for now the scientific committee has NOT decided to make tests on people assisting disabled people?
A: Of course they have, but they are prioritizing based on the actual ability to provide tests.
(Borrelli) Okay, that's it for today. Good evening.
