Press conference by Italian Civil Protection at  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WYSE7oN3ZxE on March 16




(Borrelli) Good evening and thank you everybody, Dr [missed] is with me for today's press conference.
Number of recoveries: +414, total 2749.
Number of new cases: +2470, but we must keep in mind we lack data from Puglia and Trento, but the trend is lowering, as you heard from Lombardy too. The total is 23073.
10197 are self-isolating at home without symptoms or mild symptoms.
1851 are in ICU, so still 10% of the positives.
Sadly, there are +349 deceased today.
The "cross" system transferred 7 patients today to other regions, for a total of 47,
We thank the NGO of American Evangelicals who donated a mobile hospital structure to our country, with 60 beds and 8 ICUs, which is being placed in Cremona. They will install and manage this structure for some months.
We're thankful for this generosity towards our country.
I also thank our volunteers, which are growing in number: we have more than 4000 volunteers, +700 from yesterday.
Thanks also to the police and armed forces.
Another data point that's growing is number of pre-triage tents, +52 for a total of 600. 122 pre-triage tents are in prisons.
I want to thank all those citizens who are donating bloods. That's extremely important. we need to assure the chance of curing our citizens, so i will keep inviting people to go and donate blood.
I'd like now Prof. Locatelli to speak.
(Locatelli) Thanks and good evening. I will start from what Dr Borrelli said in the final part of his speech: thanks to blood donors, it must be very clearly stated that blood donations are extremely important at this time, as requirements for them certainly do not disappear now.
Just think of thalassemy patients or major surgeries.
[...]
This is an emergency situation, where our country is employing its best resources and its best minds to face it as effectively as possible, and reduce the impact, in particular on health, but also on the healthcare system itself.
My second point is connected to this, as there is an effort from the Ministry of Health, in cooperation with the regions, to make plans for treating COVID-19 patients homogeneous across all regions, by adopting common protocols and strategies for dealing with the most critical people, by which i obviously mean those requiring ventilation.
Something connected to this is the implementation, now imminent, of rigorously conducted studies, to determine the clinical efficacy of drugs to inhibit viral replication (antivirals), as well as treatment strategies to reduce hyperinflammation that can be at the grounds of some patients' deterioration of lung function.
to do all this, and this is my fouth point, we decided to elaborate innovative methods which, while within the requirement to have rigor in these clinical trials, must allow for flexibility, because we all have as our "north star" the need to provide immediate answers, and to try to activate, as quickly as possible, these clinical trials that will allow us to understand, aside from anecdotal reports, how much in a well-conducted analysis we can have 
evidence of efficacy of these two strategies.
This is the time of maximum rigor, maximum attention, to document the validity of therapeutical approaches that can certainly be very promising, but whose efficacy must be proven without letting emotion take over. responsibility in communication must prevail.
this doesn't mean all approaches, even the most innovative, shouldn't be considered - just that we must adopt an adequate methodology.
Italy has the most people infected by COVID-19, but that also means we're a reference in the international landscape, and can have a pioneer role.
This plan will include a crucial role of AIFA (the government's pharma agency), not just in clinical trials, but also in gathering the data from patients treated using "compassionate use", i.e. outside of protocols and clinical trials
because we're all convinced that gathering and analyzing this information may provide us with very relevant information to manage these drugs in the best way and give them to the patients in the best way and have a homogeneous treatment all over the country.
Questions?




Q: can we verify the reasons why in the provines of Bergamo and Brescia there is the biggest number of cases? they registered more cases than the whole regions of Emilia-Romagna and Veneto. other Q: about the resources being allocated, are they sufficient for this emergency phase?
A: About the first part, I'll try to give an answer. It's clear what we see today is still reflecting the situation (in terms of contagion) we had 12, or 14 days ago.
To see in a full manner the reduction of new cases, and hopefully, if I may, a marked reduction of clinical impact on patients who develop respiratory insufficiency who do need to be admitted to ICU case, we still need a few days to see exactly, after the appropriate time interval, the efficacy that we count on about the containment measures.
The numbers on those two provinces are not anomalous seeing the situation there a couple of weeks ago
(Borrelli) The resources allocated are certainly the needed and sufficient ones, but whenever we need new resources, I'm certain the government will provide them.
Q: the masks and other PPEs, is there a central problem with masks? If i'm not mistaken, the 19 million that Italy was meant to get are being kept requisitioned by other countries. To Prof. Locatelli: the hygiene measures people always ask about, washing clothes and shoes... are we exaggerating, or is there a real possibility for the virus to remain on clothes and shoes and surfaces in general?
A: (Borrelli) About masks, we are very focused. we have registered blocks and interruptions from many countries that should provide our masks, because governments have requisitioned exports to guarantee their own self-sufficiency. we're working, we're working on it, i personally receive requests from many companies who tell me they want to start producing masks.
We have plans for a standard for masks that can be adequate, but with less burden than the normal authorization procedures.
Many companies are already preparing, and we hope we can start this soon.
The 50 million number... we still have that number planned, we're working on making it higher.
(Locatelli) I'll try to answer based on a concept I'd call of physiology: a virus, to be viable and to replicate, needs cells, or it can't do it. This is the reason why it's so fundamental to pay the most attention to preventing human-to-human infection. We have insisted a lot in the past few days, actually weeks, on the "droplet distance", on the need to abandon some of our customary actions such as handshakes, precisely to interrupt the transmission 
mechanism.
This is the one fundamental method the virus transmits.
Then, the fact that some droplets may fall on surfaces and be contagious for a period of time is absolutely possible, but that is why we have clearly recommended in our "ten points" the importance of washing hands frequently, using adequate detergents to remove this possible source of infection. Obviously, however, this method of transmission is very marginal compared to direct human-to-human transmission. That is where a big campaign must be conducted, as 
it's an issue that concerns all of us, individual responsibility, adequate behaviors to leave this emergency situation ASAP.
Now to taking extreme stances, like avoiding bringing clothes or shoes insides, well that's a whole different thing.
Q: newspapers talk [inaudible] From Great Britain... the epidemic could last a year... is this a data point that corresponds to Italy...?
A: (Locatelli) About the first point, peak in contagion, we must distinguish between a global scale, or even just European, compared to a national scale. In the first scenario, it's definitely possible, as we have numbers that indicate, unfortunately, in other countries too there is a substantial increase of infected and, sadly, people who don't make it. In Italy we hope for the situation to be significantly different: precisely because we have enacted 
containment measures, restrictive ones, from closing schools to closing public places and stopping other forms of gathering that used to be part of our daily life...
That was exactly with the goal of preventing this huge peak.
The scenario we expect, and which the containment measures that were adopted in Italy (and, take note, other countries are starting to adopt *now*)
which indicates the correctness of our decisions
it has the purpose of containing infections as much as possible.
The peak in infected and symptomatic people and the ability to handle them.
The fact the virus can stay around for some more months is possible, but today no one is able to state "until when".
But it's clear if we look at past epidemics, the more efficient our containment policies are, the more we will be able to avoid more episodes like this.
Q: the doctors from NAO denounced the fact 3000 health operators have contracted the virus, and demand PPEs. Also, Fontana says they WILL make that hospital in Milan, and they hope the Civil Protection will help.
A: (Borrelli) the government did everything possible to get masks. I want to remind that healthcare is in the realm of regions: the Civil Protection does not produce or market masks. I work day and night, like everyone else here, to find masks, ventilators, gloves... consumption of masks is 10x as much compared of the needs(?)
We must accept that we have no such production of masks in our country.
The fact Arcuri was nominated Commissioner is partly to create a production of masks within our country to become self-sufficient.
On creating a hospital structure with ICU in the Milan Fair, I'd be the happiest person in the world if it could be built in the shortest time possible. The issue there is, again, equipment: we are giving Lombardy ventilators, and making enhancement plans, but within a need for other regions to require some attention too, despite Lombardy needing the most attention.
Q: [inaudible] ... doesn't grow like yesterday... In some way we are going through a phase that could bring us slowly, not quite to a decline, but a decline in rising.
A: (Locatelli) That is a nice oxymoron. Well, it's a data point we look at with attention and hopeful attention if I may say so, as it's something we have noted and we value it as a signal of what the containment measures may give us.
Obviously it must be substantiated within the next 1-2 days. We do hope we can continue seeing this "decrease in increase" and then we will be more confident in saying we've reached an important result for the country.
Q: [...] Have you already started contacts with private companies for adding more ICU beds? Aside from that....... ?
A: (Borrelli) Sure, this increment has been talked about many times, we have request to increase ICU beds by 100%, and sub-ICUs, you can keep reading that there are continuing activities to create new structures. It's an activity the government is going forward with.
About private structures, yes obviously they are also being used, and each region does so depending on their requirements. In Lombardy, as we understand it, private clinics are providing a huge contributions. They had more than 200 patients yesterday.
Q: The WHO said in today's press conference that even younger people and children can get infected........?
A: (Locatelli) Below 30 years of age, there are no people who have experienced a fatal course in the disease. But this underlines that the people at risk are the elderly, and children can get infected and have very mild symptoms (something like a cold or conjunctivitis, which creates no risk for them), but they can indeed pass on the infection and create problems to elderly persons, where unfortunately, fatality is concentrated.
This was the logic that led to the decision, that other countries are now adopting, to close all schools, or at least "frontal" teaching activities.
Let me also say this as a doctor and pediatrician: the big question is, why, biologically, do children have a better ability to manage this coronavirus infection? Maybe because their immune system is, by definition, able to meet any pathogen as a "new" one, sine they spent 9 months in a protected environment, and then they must learn to defend themselves, so is it an intrinsic characteristic? Maybe their defense mechanisms against other coronavirus 
(because clearly, the COVID-19 coronavirus is not the only one we know as acting on humans)... all studies that will give us good information to "transpose" this ability to withstand the infection from children to other weak subjects.
[inaudible]
No I'll say again, it's because the majority of these children are asymptomatic, so they do not get hospitalized.
Q: about the WHO telling Italy we should make tests on asymptomatic patients... they say it must be done to stop the spread of this virus. Do you plan on making more tests?
A: (Locatelli) An observation: Italy is the country that has tested the most people thus far, and by far. The working group of the ISS, which is the top organ of the Ministry, and also the scientific committee, have clearly identified the categories of patients who deserve a test.
That is to say the subjects who present with serious respiratory symptoms, or who, even with flu-like symptoms (fever, cough, or high respiratory symptoms), are indicated to get this kind of test if they have an anamnesy (contact with subject who got this virus or come with areas with a particular concentration)...
It's obvious we must guarantee testing for these patients first and foremost, because they are the ones who most benefit from such a strategy. More widespread testing is unrealistic and not very useful for containment in our country.
Q: In an interview, you said closing schools have worked. Can you explain better what lets you deduce that?
[...]
A: Whether we'll recommend continuing school closures, I will decide it when we are closer to the end of the term. Even more clearly, we can discuss this again towards the end of March.
I can confirm what I said in my interview: this measure has been effective, or else we'd have had a much more marked growth compared to the numbers we're saying. On defining the impact on containment as a percentage, that will only be able to happen in post-hoc analyses.
Thank you.
