https://youtu.be/Fuoruwyah5g?t=620

[...] who is next to me this evening.
Today's bulletin:
+943 recoveries, total 6072.
+4821 new cases, total of current positives is 42681.
Of these, 22116 are in self-isolation with scant symptoms;
2857 are in ICU, which is 7% of the positives.
The others are hospitalized.
Unfortunately, there are +793 new deaths today.
I want to remind everyone again that we do not distinguish between people who died "with" vs "due to" coronavirus.
As to the personnel employed, we have +21 pre-triage tents today, for a total of 690, while still the same in prisons.
As of today, the number of patients moved from Lombardy using the "cross" system is 61, +1 compared to yesterday, and we are working to enhance this.
I want to thank everyone who has responded to our "call", "Doctors for Covid", which we made yesterday around 20:00, to anyone who want to contribute by becoming part of the health task force of the Civil Protection.
We received an important number, very very high, of these requests, and we thank everyone who volunteers, and they will be shortly assigned to work to help.
I want to thank Alitalia for helping a team of 52 Cuban doctors come to Lombardy to manage the field hospital in Cremona.
Finally, the face mask issue: not so much the numbers, but the controversy, also on social media... As you know, the Civil Protection Department is acquiring different masks from different channels and for different uses: surgical, FFP2, FFP3. But in this department, as in other public administration offices, we acquired masks that can allow for surgical and FFP# masks to be "freed" for medical workers. There has been no controversy on this with the Lobardy region: we are working with them to enhane theiri response capacity.

I'll let Prof. Brusaferro speak now. Please. Then questions.

(Prof. Brusaferro) Thanks, and godd evening. As is now a tradition, our ISS has produced a weekly report, as well as daily infographics, which you can see on our site.
There is a generl epidemiology analysis over the country, with an attachment by provine and by municipality as well as by region, and then there is a focused reports on deaths, as that's a subject that we have most at heart, and try to analyze in as much detail as possible.
We will keep publishing these data as they come available and evidence is created.
The important data point is that there is a high circulation on the northern regions, which are now under deep pressure, restricting their social life and assistance. We have circulation in other parts of Italy, but with contained numbers so far.
Let me remind you that the reason we adopted such restrictive measures in our lives have the goal to prevent a circulation that is as sustained as in some regions.
We are somewhat comforted by the fact that other countries that, unfortunately, are getting sustained circulation, are adopting the same measures as us.
Another element that must be highlighted is that the people being hit the hardest are characterized, as confirmed by our initially sketched scenario, in specifically important ways: there is a median age around 63 years, while the deceased are around 80 years. Males are harder hit than females, and again, there is a median time between symptoms and diagnosis of 5 days, and that's a challenge for us, because we must "intercept" and isolate people with symptoms sooner.
The other thing is a number of deaths that is fairly high, today unfortunately too, but when we look at the specifics, they are the same as we saw in the previous days. You will find it in the report, which does not consider every single death reported in the Civil Protection data, but there are several hundreds files we have and are acquiring, which at this point are representative of reality as a sample, and which tell us that the population is around 80 year old, and mortality is by far more prevalent over 70 and over 80, and in people with comorbidities. It also tells us about complications such as kidney or respiratory failure, which characterize the clinical course of these people, and it tells us the most relevant symptoms are: fever, cough, dyspnea.
We suffer from an important data point, which before this epidemic, was a pride in our country, that of having a population with a high life expectancy, even when people had several comorbidities. Unfortunately this virus removes the balance from a strenously maintained equilibrium in some people.
This way the virus "targets" people and specifically the fact it targets airways puts these people in jeopardy.

We thank the effort from all operators to provide assistance.
I'd like to conclude with two points: first, we must be rigorous in respecting the restrictions. Yesterday the Ministry of Health released an ordnance restricting movement further, and that is a strong signal that tells us "we are still not sufficiently considering the danger in our communities", and there are still situations where, with excuses such as having a walk, gatherings are created. Having a walk is fine, but we must do it alone. If we "cheat" the rules, we damage the most vulnerable members of our society, not just ourselves, and this tells us also that the elderly MUST stay home.
We must systematically enforce these measures, and if we don't have enforcement mechanisms, we won't stop the infection.
A large part of the country is in fact adopting the measures, and is helping us slow down the spread and make it sustainable by our healthcare services, at all levels, so they can offer assistance to get over this infection.
The key thing respecting the rules, and being aware that if we don't, it's not just our problem: it's a problem for our neighbors, for the elderly, for the more fragile among our children, for the whole part of the population which, when hit, can have a bad prognosis, as we have to witness today.
Thank you.




Q: about being drastic in making the measures respected, obviously there have been breaches, but many people just leave home because they go to work; in the provinces of Bergamo and Brescia most factories are still open. So are you requesting that the government review the provision of essential systems? Or maybe implementing delivery of food at home, instead of having people go to the supermarket? Limiting the movement of people who are going to work?
A: (Borrelli) I believe we must limit, as we said, movement to the maximum possible; there are needs that must be provided for. We certainly cannot provide food delivery for everyone, so some limitations have been envisioned for non-essential work activities, but there is a whole lot of supply chains, like food and public services, that must be guaranteed.
So I think we have adopted the best measures we could adopt, beyond which the whole country would be shut down, but then I'd wonder how we possibly could survive if we can't even get food or anything.
Maybe you want to add something...?
(Prof.) From the scientific point of view, distancing is the key.
This is a problem in the workplace too, and it's the most important element.
Social distancing is the key element.
We can reason on other things, but I definitely feel like reiterating this.
The other thing we can add is that we're in a phrase where the curve is growing, we must see about the March 11 measures, which extended the lockdown to the whole country, we'll see during the next days the impact of that.
But I say again, the impact will be lowered if behaviors that aren't sufficiently appropriate, or "tricks" to bypass restrictions, well those are not the solution, they are not clever! They are a problem for everyone, especially the most vulnerable.
Q: Can we go back to the issue of deaths? You always told us they are people who are elderly and with comorbidites... but how do these people die? 546 victims in ONE DAY in Lombardy, with [missed] in ICU... how do these people die? are there no ICU beds?
A: We are analyzing... as a general consideration, I'll speak through the data: you saw yesterday's bulletin, which was made based on a detailed analysis of these people's files.
When these people are elderly and have diseases, an infection like pneumonia (which is the most salient clinical manifestation of this virus) reaches a threshold of insufficiency, which adds to other things that may have been kept under control until then, but now it gets no longer under control.
What we have evidence for from the clinical file is, indeed, linked to pneumonia making a situation untenable; or, respiratory insufficiency that adds on to patients with cancer, terminal cancer, or very serious prognoses, where this additional element is the spark that destroys equilibrium.
The number is... big... but the numbers are very concentrated in some age groups, which of course doesn't mean those lives aren't precious as all others; but it does give us this virus's "target", which is why we keep repeating: stay home! for elderly especially, stay home.
We have locked down nursing home, disallowed visits, these are serious measures that create big issues, but we are doing it based on the assumption that these people are really vulnerable, and we must reduce the risk of an infection getting into these structures, as it would spread very quickly.
I say this both as a scientist and as a person who's the son of elderly parents: stay hom.
Q: about the center-south of Italy... you mentioned it, we calculated there are 72 victims today in the center-south, about 1/10th of the total. How do you evaluate the trend? You often said it's difficult to reason on "peaks" in time, but to try to understand the trends in the southern areas that have not been hit too hard so far, and to know whether there is adequate healthcare potential if those places had a spike.
A: (Prof.) The first question... it tells us of an Italy where all regions HAVE community circulation. Of different origins, but all regions are facing it: it's not do we have it, do we not, it is, what is the curve?
In the majority of regions now, the curve is sustainable and manageable by the healthcare service.
But this curve is what we see today, and we mentioned the number of cases is important: it takes about 4-7 days for symptoms, and hospitalization can happen later, and death even later.
So I want to point out that the deaths we register today do not result from yesterday, but from several days ago.
The bet for the southern regions is that these curves CAN be modified, and the number of cases may be limited to a sustainable amount of the health service.
I'll let Borrelli illustrate the measures.
(Borrelli) All the regions, based on the Hleath Ministry, started a program of enhancement of treatment structures and making ICU beds from 5000 to about 8000. It's a work being done day by day, now also by Commissioner Arcuri, who is working with us and with the regions to enhance the structures.
Pulmonology and other departments are also being enhanced. We are running against time, and we are working relentlessly.
At the moment, the numbers we register in the south are numbers that we can face with the resources we put in place.
Q: the Bergamo/Lombardy situation is being talked about a lot, about the hypothesis of a "moment zero", during a particular football match. Are you studying this hypothesis, to explain why there is such a huge cluster there?
A: it is one of the hypotheses, but at this time it is fairly difficult to analyze. It is only one of the hypotheses, partly because the healthcare load in those places make it so that the uttermost priority is just treating people.
I believe it's very important, in any case, especially in those areas, to keep VERY rigorous behaviors as recommended.
Certainly, what we see today is behaviors from a week ago about the new cases, and probably from 8-10-15 days ago with the deaths.
This is a wave we are getting from previous infections.
The bet is in today's behaviors.
The other extremely important thing, everywhere in the country, is that people who have been close contacts, or who are quarantined at home, they MUST stay at home, they must respect the quarantine.
This is very important because it's true in the country where many activities are suspended, and this choice is sustainable at the moment.
We understand it's difficult to be stuck in your apartment or home, but it's a sacrifice that is important for us and for the country.
Q: aside from face masks, there is another thing that's creating controversy: limiting the opening hours of supermarkets. Some people think this can create bigger crowds, and higher risk of infection. What is your view? In particular, are you considering a single directive from the central government?
A: (Borrelli) I believe we must avoid crowds, avoid gatherings, so my personal idea is that if the opening hours are longer, we reduce the concentration and the queues and annoyance for the population.
We do need to have uniformity of behavior across the country: everyone must know there are opening hours to go shopping, and whether they be longer or shorter, they should be uniform.
(Prof.) We said, social distancing is the thing. As an "adopted" Roman now, i appreciate the fact that when I go to the Institute in the morning, i see queues that are very long in front of supermarkets, but people do keep their distance.
I can see it's not easy for people to wait there standing, although the climate is helping, but I do appreciate the fact i see people keeping their distances.
It is the best example and it is what we must do.
That said, we must discuss various measures, but the key point is, when we see crowds in tobacconists, or in parks with excuses, or when we go walking in groups, that is NOT the correct behavior.
Q: When you answered my colleague you said that football match may have been a cause of the cluster in Lombardy. What are other hypotheses? If we look at the data, Lombardy has a very high mortality, with +527 deaths today. Is it just that the restrictive measures came late?
A: no, no, I believe the restrictive measures were enacted soon in Lombardy: see Codogno and its area, when they were quarantined, and doing that reduced new cases and reduced the virus's circulating.
I cannot express hypotheses now, because when we define hypotheses scientifically, we build them and then we check them against the numbers we have.
At this time, the priority, in that context, is supporting the healthcare assistance, and reducing circulation. Analyses come later in our priorities.
I must say it's very important to adopt these measures, especially in Lombardy, which started from a situation where initial circulation was significant, and the original "red zones", where we were very quick to lock down, but still at that time, some positive people had already left or already had contacts, and so there was circulation in the surrounding zones, and the virus propagated, in the direction of Bergamo, Brescia, and the northern part of Emilia.
This tells us how the virus moves around mainly by contiguous areas.
Q: We said that even younger people sometimes end up in ICU. Do we have data on that, and most importantly, do we know if those people had comorbidities?
A: Sorry, at the moment we do not have specific and solid data on ICUs, especially clinically; we do have data on deaths, where people below 50 or 40 years of age, while some died, they were all characterized by the presence of serious comorbidities.
That is, they had all of the risk factors, except age.
Hence the recommendation, sure, elderly must stay home, but also other people, especially the immunodepressed, must stay protected.
Q: we read from many sources that the numbers are probably not making sense anymore, because each region is reacting on its own, and what can be predicted from these figures gets proven wrong each day. How do you see that? Is it just the fault of citizens not obeying the rules, or is there something in the "Italy model" that is not working? Also referencing the mask controversy: if we let people go shopping without masks, as they are not available, 
then maybe the lockdown just doesn't work, and the situation is out of control. Is this plausible?
A: (Borrelli) I'll let the professor speak about epidemiology.
(Prof.) Many times we saw on the press that even people who are very intelligent but maybe not experts in this particular discipline, they made models, predicting peaks and so on.
But you have never, never heard me doing these forecasts, which suffer from some assumption, and in a phase of growth, they risk being misleading.
So yes, I get and share what you're saying, and we must simulate, calculate, which is scientifically important, but we must also know that any prediction suffers from its assumptions, which must come true if the prediction should come true as modeled.
This is why I've never said things like "we're nearing the peak", "there's been a decrease today".
We must work with solid data, having a horizon and expectations.
We expect, right now, with the restrictions that are adopted, to see something next week.
Frankly, what you say... "we model predictions, and then if they don't work, we change them?"
But also, some measures like in the red zones did objectively bring about a significant reduction of the R0.
That doesn't mean there aren't new cases, there are new cases even in China, but the number is reduced.
Maybe our measures through the whole country, which may be less draconian than the restrictions in the red areas, but maybe they can bring about a reduction of the R0 below 1.
We try to analyze that day by day, but I have to say that today's deaths, while dramatic for the whole country, are brought about from an earlier period.
I believe that even in this press conference we did remark several times some behaviors that happened some time ago that created issues.
You can also see it elsewhere in Europe: events that shouldn't have occurred, that created new cases later.
Whenever we get "signs", we will be fast and transparent in sharing them.
But even if we see those "signs", even though we wish not to see them, it will not mean we must give up.
Q: Without getting into the merit of constitutionality of limitations, complete limitations, to people's freedoms... in taking such draconian measures, aside from the specific duration which is sometimes peculiar (like the latest 4-day restriction)... did the government take the consequences into account, while respecting the pain and the deaths, did they consider that assuming such draconian measures on more than 60 million citizens... were the 
intangible consequences considered? Stress, panic, psychological breakdowns within families... It's obvious that these measures were taken because a bunch of true imbeciles did not respect the initial measures. Okay. But was the reaction not taking up measures that are excessive? You must have heard that domestic violence reports have gone down 50%, and that's likely NOT because male partners have become nicer. I think one of the component members of the 
scientific committee said he was in favor of "shutting down" the whole of Lombardy, but not the whole country.
A: you are certainly bringing up a very real and current problem, the psychological equilibrium in relationships, and I'd add another critical element: that of disabled people, which used to find assistance during their daily activities at specialized centers, and they cannot get it now, and are completely a burden on their familiies.
I must admit that minister Speranza is starting activities for this, and we also had a meeting with the President of the Union of Psychologists, and we are designing methods to [...]
But I also want to see the half-full part of the glass: this is a chance to get people back together, friends, relatives, among generations, too.
I like to underline that the behaviors of the younger people, and of "baby boomers", my generation, are behaviors that at this time are and must be caring for our parents.
We must guarantee they get groceries, medicines.
This doesn't mean that the whole of society doesn't have to work together to create a solidarity network for support, which can help, when we tell elderly people "stay at home", to enable them to make this actually possible.
I do believe further initiatives will be adopted, and the whole of the government is focused on this.
Q: in your opinion, also when we continue monitoring this virus, has there been a mutation at this point? And a vaccine, a potential vaccine among the candidates, do they have some chance to solve this huge problem in the short term?
A: that's something we all wonder about, and from the virology data we have no evidence that the virus has mutated. But this is today. We said this is a new epidemic, which we are learning about, and which works differently, is a function of the kind of population it impacts...
So the answer to the first question is, no, not today, neither here nor in other Euroepan countries.
About the vaccine, I believe it is one of the goals today that the best players in the field have.
There are various products already in animal testing, at an advanced stage... but we must understand what advcaned means: if you ask me will we have it in one month? My answer is not. But in a year? Maybe.
Having a vaccine must mean it has been tested, but also been produced in millions of doses.
I think some groups are asking for authorization to begin testing phases, so we aren't seeing results yet.
(Borrelli) Thanks and good evening.
