Italy's daily Civil Protection press conference at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KOjhlqX_87U on April 6



(Borrelli) Good evening. Today I'm here with Luca Richeldi.
Positives: 93187, +1941 today.
3898 are in ICU, and for the third day in a row, the number of ICU patients has been going down.
28976 are hospitalized with symptoms, while 60313 (65%) are self-isolating at home.
+636 new deaths. 22837 recoveries, +1022.
We have obtained more than 107.5 million euros from donations, which will be used for acquiring PPEs and ventilators. We have spent 6.4 million today, for 19 million total.
16281 volunteers are being employed aside from our other personnel.
Number of pre-triage tents is unchanged.
Yesterday I signed an ordnance istituting a fund for relatives of medical personnel who have died during this emergency. This fund was promoted by Della Valle.
This morning a plane landed with PPEs donated by China to Europe, and thanks to the European Civil Protection system, these PPEs have been all transferred to our country.
I'll let Prof. Richeldi speak now.
(Prof.) I'd like to greet a friend and colleague, Dr Magrini, who was diagnosed with COVID-19, so he's self-isolating. I've been able to exchange a few messages, he seemed in great physical and psychological shape and he's still working. He's the director of AIFA and he's crucial in the research of new drugs against this virus.
Today's data confirm the trend we've seen for a few days, which is comforting as it shows containment measures are working.
The weekly data, so March 30 and April 6, we have more than 90% less people hospitalized. This trend adds to the very important one of ICU admissions, which has been the crucial issue with this epidemic. Today we have -79 ICU.
Most of the deaths were concentrated in Lombardy, but still, on a weekly basis we wee 20% fewer deaths, and during this week the number has substantially kept going going down, albeit less significantly than hospitalizations. I need to remind you that the deaths need time to go down compared to other data.
The last comment I'd like to make is that these data are comforting but, as often reiterated, we are seeing these effects thanks to the restrictive measures that have been enacted.
So this must make us more determined in maintaining these measures, although after April 13 a decision on this will be made at a political level, but I think we can all see the result of our efforts.
(Borrelli) Questions now.




Q: Today the Union of Lombard Medical Doctors has published a 7-point analysis detailing what they think were the mistakes in Lombardy, which I'll summarize as: to few PPEs for doctors, and too few tests, especially at first. Is there a mistake, or several mistakes, that without accusing anyone, just with hindsight, things you'd have done differently?
A: I believe this virus is an invisible enemy that hit us all of a sudden; it's been a time during which we haven't been able, including at a medical level, to verify and contain and adopt measures that were perfected later, it was a huge job by Lombard doctors, and I don't think we could have done better than this. I believe Lombard doctors did everything that they knew and could, with what they had available.
Q: If I can add a comment... I agree with what Dr Borrelli said, but these analyses are worthwhile, because we must learn from experiences. In a catastrophic situation like the one Lombardy found itself in, it was impossible to do better; but certainly learning from the past will help in the future.
Q: Data are less alarming, we can say that, yesterday we even heard talks of a "phase 2", and the scientific committee is already deciding how to face this "phase 2", and there have been requests to re-open some small productive activities... at this time we can't expect to start with "phase 2" next week or so, but can we lay out strategy?
A: Once scientific evaluations are made, the political decider, i.e. the Council of Ministers, will decide the time and methods "phase 2" will happen with.
We scientific committee and the ministers are working on this, but the decision will be taken when the picture will be clear.
(Prof.) If I may add something, the data are not "not" alarming, but "less" alarming; we have had many deaths, and the trend must comfort us but still alarm us at the same time.
Q: You reminded us of how important the Civil Protection is... the PM always said that he will consider scientific evaluations for his political decisions; for now, the end of the measures is planned to be on April 13, and today it's already April 6; what do you think will be the last useful date for you to give recommendations to the PM on extending the measures or not?
A: I am not part of the scientific committee... but I think it will provide timely information to the PM, and I don't think we'll have to wait until the last minute.
Q: I understand you don't want to say too much... but these recommendations, are they sent through a report, a document, a public document?
A: They are expressed through a report.
(Prof.) The recommendations will be all the more precise and specific if the trend data are clear and specific. These data are extremely important to interpret the epidemic, both nationally and locally. The closer we get to the deadline, the more this data becomes granular and informational... The committee won't wait until the last minute, but they also cannot ignore what happens between today and April 13. It will be a compromise between maximizing information, and allowing enough time for lawmaking. It is not simple to balance these things.
Q: It's been weeks since we've been testing drugs in hospitals; is there now more evidence on which drugs works and which drugs are the best? Also, there have been talks of drugs that may make the infection worse, such as Ibuprofen.
A: The site of AIFA, which is open, free to read for all citizens, provides two important pieces of information: one is on available medicines, although they are mainly targeted to doctors, but available for all citizens to read... there are cards on hydrochlorequine, antivirals, etc... the second type of information available is on ongoing trials and their updates. The number of trials is increasing, and Prof. Locatelli gave numbers on that last Saturday.
What you say is true, with time we are accumulating more data that will be made public as soon as the amount of data can provide reliable information. This is why trials exist. The first trials are reaching a point where likely AIFA will be able to provide results in some weeks.
Q: [inaudible]
A: Yes, the question was on potentially damaging drugs, and during trials we hope it's more likely to be useful than harmful, but that's why trials exist.
Q: Why is there a specific part on the ISS reports on which drugs deceased patients had been taking?
Atque, no
A: You are probably referring to ACE inhibitors, which a large part of the population is taking, especially the elderly. It's an element that's not easy to identify as a risk factor, because it's a drug taken by a large part of the elderly population. An exact risk factor on these has not been determined, there are no solid data.
Q: To relent pressure on ICU beds, when patients start doing better, they are moved back to their homes. However, we're told that there's starting to be a shortage of oxygen bottles. Do we risk a scenario like with masks?
A: On this subject we have received a request by Lombardy highlight a critical situation, and we made a "call" to the Civil Protection mechanism to acquire more bottles; the MoH is also working on obviating this lack of bottles, and I believe the number of people who are in hospital and positive will bring a benefit in terms of needing these bottles.
Q: There's a heated debate on masks, and some regions like Lombardy and Tuscany promised to distribute them for free... we have had a suspicion that the people aren't strictly told to wear masks outside not for actual scientific reasons, not only at least, but for the simple reason there are not enough of them. Is this a suspicion based in reality?
A: Look, the thing about masks is there's a global discussion within the scientific community. Just a few days ago, Anset published an article showing various things: first, there is no recommendation to use masks universally in various countries and regions; there are a variety of recommendations, which partly reflect different traditions: you will remember that we've always seen Asian people in airports wearing surgical masks even years ago. This is a consolidated habit, which isn't the case in the western world, and which represents a different lifestyle. That masks are useful against this coronavirus is certain, in particular to exposed people like medical workers and vulnerable people.
So, I don't honestly believe that not recommending universal use of masks is due to shortages. We are finding a better way to use them rationally. Let's remember one thing though: using masks doesn't make us invincible. There are measures like social distancing and hand washing that have certainty of efficacy. There's a risk of masks inducing a false sense of security. It is a "defense tool" for healthcare workers, but for others, who are not 
professionally exposed to the virus, it can be a useful defense but it must not cause a lowering of one's guard.
Q: Do you think we'll use them much more in "phase 2"?
A: I cannot predict anything about "phase 2", but from what we've seen in other countries and settings, that is possible, there may be a wider use of masks, which will likely correlate with people's perceived sensibility. We'll likely have to use it in places where social distancing is impossible or problematic. I don't expect universal use 24/7.
Information on this wasn't even on virology books until a couple of weeks ago. We are learning from experiene.
(Borrelli) Okay, thank you and good evening.
