Ital's daily Civil Protection press conference at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u8U_cqnatJs on April 17.
Subsequent conferences will NO LONGER be daily, but twice-weekly.




Good evening. Thanks to President of ISS, Franco Locatelli
Currently positive is 106962, +355.
Pressure on hospitals is going down, 2812 patients in ICU, -124.
25786 are hospitalized with symptoms, -1207 patients, the lowest since March 27.
Most are self-isolating at home, 78364 (73%).
+575 deaths, while recoveries are 42727 in total.
+2563 recoveries is the highest number even for now.
We did nearly 66000 tests.
19913 volunteers are working, together to other personnel.
Pre-triage tests are 878, 151 are in penitentiaries.
Donations have reached 127.7 million, 34 million of which have already been used for purchasing PPEs and ventilators.
Tomorrow another part of our nurse task force is leaving to affected regions.
Today's healthcare data indicate that pressure on hospitals decidedly went down, which is a data point that's becoming more solid during the past weeks.
In this emergency phase we are then "remodulating" or press conferences, we'll still provide data on our site and social media, but the press conferences will only happen on Mondays and Thursdays.
This adds to the press conferences by Commissioner Arcuri at noon Tuesdays and Saturdays, and the ISS press conference at noon on Fridays.
We all heard the words of ex-minister Guidi on the topic of disability, which is even more important during this emergency. I received a letter from the father of a son affected by autism. It outlined the complexity of the situation especially during this emergency. Our department has the resources and responsibility to aid these people.
I told this father we will provide all the possible assistance. In thanking me and the Civil Protection, he addressed another letter to me, which he wants to share with all of us.
It would be impossible to read it all now: there are words of pain but not for an instant do they make hope and trust dwindle.
"Since the diagnosis of autism, we have always left some empty space in our luggage, and that space was for hope."
I really hope that the words of these people who face small and big personal challenges in addition to our current emergency are all the more encouraging us.
(Prof.) Thank you... Good evening, I think Dr Borrelli's closing words have shown a picture on various perspectives that this epidemic created, in particular on what it entailed in terms of challenges and pain for a portion of the population, aside from the number of deaths, which I will talk about in a bit.
Some thoughts that I hope will be useful to define the current scenario. Dr Borrelli cited the numbers on hospitalized people, and in particular ICU... if we go back just 2 weeks, on April 3, there were 4063 patients in ICUs. Today this is little more than 2800. This lets you gauge just how much the pressure on health structures has gone down, allowing those who are tasked with ICU management to handle not just COVID-19 patients but everyone who needs ICU admission.
Let me remind you that before the epidemic began, we had little more than 5000 ICU beds, so imagine the situation with more than 4065 ICU patients, in terms of difficulty in guaranteeing assistance to the people who needed ICU for reasons that were not just COVID-19.
The other number is about the amount of tests done. If we "normalize" the number of positives, or rather if we calculate the percentage of positives on tests done, it's 5.35%, and this is a further indicator of the measures taken in terms of social distancing and lockdown.
But Dr Borrelli also mentioned the number of deaths, and I will use this number not just to acknowledge their sacrifice by the representative of the state, but also to remind ourselves that on Sunday will be the day for donation of organs and tissues. These numbers that have "clawed" our consciences should make us reflect on the "culture of organ donation": a culture that was never promoted enough, and which must permeate the consciences of all of us. 
Without organ donations, some existences will be irremediably lost. Only by "donating" ourselves we can give a sense to our existence.
Starting on 26 February, the National Transplantation Service has been able to provide 330 organ transplants, without considering stem cells which are coordinated with the Register of Bone Marrow Donations, which I thank most deeply.
There is a lot of discussion on serology tests. I would like to summarize some things on their deployment: they will allow us to conduct the so-called sero-prevalence study, i.e. determining the percentage of people who reside in Italy and who have been infected, came into contact with the coronavirus.
As a matter of fact, this sero-prevalence test will be conducted using either ELIZA tests, or chemo-luminiscense tests, in order to have solid and reliable data. For this reason, the scientific committee I am a part of provider Commissioner Accuracy some indications on how to choose the tests: specificity must be over 95%, and sensitivity above 90%, and they must be validated either by labs or by national or international bodies, which can be done on a large scale, and in each region.
This test should be able to provide quick, really quick response to provide any useful information from this study.
Within the next few hours, a "call" to all companies that believe they have tests matching the requisites above will be opened and kept open for 5 days, after which, a panel identified by Arcuri will proceed with identifying the one test that will be chosen for conducting this study on a sample of 150000 Italian residence, which are selected with the cooperation of ISTAT on the basis of six age groups, regional representation (as we said we expect different seroprevalence in the various regions), and work profiles.
It must be crystal clear that this seroprevalene study will be conducted in cooperation with the regions, and here I thank all the regions and the autonomous provinces who expressed their full support for this test.
I say it often, but it's never enough, AIFA has had a great role, they evaluated 93 research projects, 19 were approved, and 10 of these studies have already started.
This is an extraordinary result that was obtained in just one solar month, and it represents a turning point in terms of the efficiency of conducting clinical studies in our countries.
Beyond this, AIFA guarantees vigilance on pharmacology, elaborates guidelines for all these clinical trials, provides information and education material on their website, and they can ensure adequate drug provisions for all hospital structures to avoid shortages.
In this challenging situation our country has been facing, what AIFA did repreesents, I believe, a very good note, as did the success in containing the risk of infection in central and southern Italy. This is now a solidly data with numerical evidence, and today, 13 regions and autonomous provinces have a number of deaths below two digits, and two regions have had no deaths at all.
(Borrelli) Questions now...




Q: These are definitely positive data, which explains why you are no longer making daily press conferences, but there is still something that doesn't compute: we've still had 3500 new cases. I know there have been more tests, with the lowest positive percentage, but isn't the problem lying in self-isolation at home? We have 78000 people at home who are positive. Today, Prof. Paolo Branchini said clearly that when in Wuhan they realized the "plateau" never actually went down, they realized the problem was in home self-isolation, and they placed those people in special structures for quarantine. Don't you think this is the problem? These people are in homes with relatives who are getting infected.
A: (Borrelli) Since the beginning of the emergency we surveyed our structures to find places to guarantee quarantine for people who are unable to do it at home. We have about 7000 beds in various structures, and we have arranged to find locations with the region and local authorities, and we're also making a poll (it began last Saturday, should give us results tomorrow), to determine which structures have actually been provided, including those for homeless people. It's an activity we started with local entities, with regions, from which we'll shortly have statistical data on the beds made available. I believe it's tens of thousands, so there will be a chance for those who need it to be hosted in those structures.
I believe in the model of this pandemic, the idea of adding "satellite structures" to COVID hospitals, somewhat like the way it happened here in Rome at Policlinico Gemelli, is one that should be pursued, but I'll let the professor speak on that.
Q: [inaudible] ... who's at home, know about the 3500 new infections. Do you know how many of these were at home with people who were self-isolating at home and were positive?
A: At this time there is no evidence of how many of the positives come from intra-family infections versus other routes, but there is no doubt that contagion at home may contribute in a significant amount. So everything that has been specified as "the 5 points" on which to build "phase 2" has a particular attention both on what pertains to territorial medicine and what is more about tele-medicine and contact tracing, which will be useful under this viewpoint. I also fully endorse what Dr Borrelli said about the option, for people whose domicile cannot guarantee adequate isolation, to find appropriate structures.
Q: A question for both of you: in 2018, the government perfected an "anti-pandemic" plan, based on the knowledge on pandemics that had happened previously, like MERS and SARS... That plan exists, it's 74 pages, it has 5 goals, 7 key passages, and well, there are some very clear things in it: for example, paths to hospitals had to be reserved; people shouldn't go to the ER during a pandemic but treated at home; that territorial medicine had to be prepared to something like this... and many other things. When reading it, I thought: well look, if we had done those things, maybe it'd have all gone differently. The question is this: on 30 January we declared a state of national emergency. What happened to that pandemic plan? Did the regions put it into force?
A: (Borrelli) As you said there is a Parliament petition, the Minister of Health will be tasked with answering it. It was a plan on influenza pandemics, as far as I know. As soon as the coronavirus issue came up, the Ministry of Health set up a task force and start to figure out how to face it. So, with regard to that plan, evaluations were made and then a plan was formulated including enhancement of ICU beds on March 1. There was work by the Ministry of Health, I don't know the details because they are about healthcare planning, both regional and central by the Ministry, so, there was organizational activity that led to the plan increasing ICU and sub-ICU units. I don't think Prof. Locatelli has more elements to add...
Q: Okay, but, excuse me... that is true, it was an anti-influenza plan, but it was created after SARS and MERS, so it foresaw pandemics from virus because species hopping had been observed to be possible. So the plan asked to implement the required actions BEFORE the emergency not after. So the question remains: what had been done BEFORE the emergency, before January 31?
A: I can tell you now: this is a new virus. How can we imagine preparing a plan on a virus we don't know? But let me say, I just cannot provide these details, as I was not part of this pandemic prevention activity. I will ask the Ministry of Health and ensure you get some answers.
Q: [inaudible]
A: Thank you.
Q: A topic from yesterday... you talked about task forces leaving or planning to leave to regions, including doctor task forces... are there other forces included in the foreseen task forces aside from doctors and nurses?
A: We'll integrate the task force with doctors and nurses, but we still lack socio-sanitary operators, particularly for prisons, nursing homes, and homes for disabled people. We are planning a new ordinance to also add these professional profiles which are still missing.
Q: Prof. Locatelli, on deaths: today it's +576, so we have an increase again... it's still many. When will we actually see a substantial downward trend?
A: Thank you for your question. It offers me the chance to share a thought on an interview I read this morning, with an intensive care colleague of mine, Dr Lorini, who basically reported that the number of deaths in the past few days has gone back to being more or less the same as the number of deaths in the "pre-COVID era". Obviously we'd like to bring deaths to zero, and that's why I used the expression that these events "claw" our consciences and sensibilities, and that's why I solicited organ and blood donations, as an example of what we can all, as individauls, do something to help others. I will attempt to specify later how people can become organ or tissue donors, if I may. It's certainly true that we expect the number to go down every day, and when we see fluctuations, each of us feels hurt... but it's obvious there is always a lag between infections and fatal events. It is certain that the number of deaths will go down further, but we do need to have this always in mind. Precisely because as Dr Borrelli said I will have fewer chances to be hear speaking, it is the right time to call for the need to be cautious and attentive in resuming our social and work life, while implementing (and I'm going back to the question on preparing for certain events) a way to catch "canary" events early, to make sure what will hopefully just be a reactivation in local clusters remains that, without becoming a regional or even multi-regional issue again.
Q: On number of deaths, this morning Dr. Rezza of ISS said explicitly that while the trend is downwards, in mid May there will still not be "zero" deaths. So I want to go back to the question from my colleague, in a more direct way: what is the threshold, what is the number of new cases that would let you as members of the scientific committee give the "go ahead" to relaxation of the restrictions?
A: Clearly I could answer simply as "as low as possible", but I'll try to articulate better: all the work that is being done in the past few days, and believe me, it's a detailed work where very many variables are considered, from work profiles to movement of people, transportation types being used, rules to make public transport as safe as possible, this must all be calibrated in a way to keep the R index below the famous threshold of 1, as we know that is the parameter that lets us have a manageable situation, both for the national healthcare system, and for avoiding a number of deaths like in these past few days, such a tragic number. All this will evidently allow modulating the various measures depending on exactly how well the predictive models are able to evaluate the ability to keep R below 1, and to use surveillance and monnitoring systems to keep the clusters that may present as small as possible.
Q: A question about infection for Prof. Locatelli: how long do people remain infectious? Will quarantine still last 14 days, or, since there have been cases who were found positive even after 30 days? And in Italy there was one case of one lady in Verona, but in South Korea, as many as 91 patients who were quarantined, then had two negative tests, went back to work, and then... they were positive again and hospitalized. Are those people who are re-infected, or are they false negatives, in which case we'd need even more tests? We won't get out of this then!
A: This question would require an articulated and faceted answer, including biological and even immunological considerations, which is particularly interesting to me. First thing you mention is the duration of the quarantine. It was set to two weeks, but with a very specific criterion of needing two negative tests for people who were clearly positive in the initial test, before allowing them to re-enter society and work, to guarantee these people are not infectious. Some of them will certainly have had a persistence of positive tests well beyond 14 days, but in practice that's a sign of how good the monitoring system is when re-introducing people into society. Why some people "clear" the virus faster or slower may be influenced by many variables, which may be related to viral load (it is reasonable to presume those with a low viral load can clear the infection faster) and to the efficiency of immune response against the virus, and this ties to the second part of your question: actual re-infection, versus an infectious process that just seemed to have stopped but then "re-ignited": try to understand, I certainly don't want to doubt the data from our Korean colleagues, but I am more comforted when we have data from our own country. You rightly referred to one single case in Italy. There is a big question, but none of us have always denied it, about how long immunity may lasts, and that is why we've said, among other reasons, that this contributes to the need to avoid using the term "immunity passport" inappropriately: We know that the antibody response is an indication of exposure to the virus, of infection, and of an elaboration by the "humoral branch" of our immunity... but the response to a virus has a strong component from the "cell-mediated branch", involving T-lyphocites, and when we're talking about antibodies against SARS-CoV-2, we're talking about a whole world of diverse antibodies, where what we're interested in the most as doctors, as immunologists, is the tither of "neutralizing antibodies", those that prevent attack by the virus on the cells of our body, and in particular on cells of our respiratory system, specifically the interaction with the receptor. They're all questions that only time will answer, but after conducting well-structured studies that need to be conducted with the utmost attention, without neglecting any aspect.
Q: Certainly you provided a few encouraging pieces of data today, but it still appears we're in the "plateau" part. So I wonder, what effort do we need to make to bring R from 1 towards 0? What is missing to reach this goal?
A: The R0 is already below 1, and if we want to guesstimate a value, it may be 0.8 or so... but we need to employ those five tools that have been repeatedly mentioned in the past few days: contact tracing, testing, PPEs, COVID hospitals, and implementing territorial medicine... but I'll add a sixth element: individual responsibility in behaviors.
Q: I'd like to understand something more about the app and "phase 2": since it is on a voluntary and not compulsory basis, for reasons of privacy, isn't that a tool that won't be very useful? If only, say, one million Italians download it, what advantages can it provide? Second thing, still about the app, how will contact monitoring of positive people work? I assumed there would be blanket testing on contacts, but we've had difficulties with testing in the past few months, so will testing be ramped up, or will there just be self-isolation?
A: (Prof.) I'll start then Dr Borrelli can complement my answer. I think the app represents a potentially very useful instrument, and when I mentioned individual responsibility, I can extend that broadly to people's willingness to use the app even though, for obvious reasons of privacy, it will be a voluntary option... but let me say as a doctor, it should be STRONGLY encouraged. We talked about a "call", and I'm adopting this term for this. It will provide tools to be more targeted on conducting research studies on the viral RNA, tests, as we'll have a further instrument that complements what the app provides to identify people who are infected at a given time, and contribute to reducing (and I'm going back to the first question asked) the intra-family contagion. So, definitely a very useful tool, that can contribute to managing the situation as best as possible in the coming weeks.
Q: So will there be more tests on people, or is that not foreseen and isolation of all contacts will be enough?
A: I think "complementing" is a very useful way to better and more completely define the advantages offered by the the app.
(Borrelli) So... we end now...
(Prof.) If you have no further questions, let me show you again what Prof. Brusaferro also showed earlier today: an encouragement to become organ and tissue donors: there is a "Let's give the best of us" website where people can register, and I think this would also be a demonstration of interest towards others and evidence of what Italy can give, in terms of "bio"-solidarity. Thank you.
(Borrelli) Thank you Prof. Locatelli. So, our next appointment will be on Monday at 18:00. Thank you.
