(Borrelli) Good evening.
Let me introduce Prof. Roberto Bernabei, geriatrist in Rome and president of the "Italia Longeva" association.
He'll focus on older adults and their reaction to coronavirus.
Today's bulletin:
+689 recoveries, for a total of 5129
+4670 new cases, for a total of 37860
19185 of them are in self-isolation with few symptoms
2655 is the people in ICU, 7% of the total
Unfortunately we register +627 dead, and i want to remind they died "with" coronavirus, not necessarily "from" coronavirus: as you know, the ISS will certify the actual deaths "from" it.
We have 1000 more volunteers today fighting this epidemic, I want to thank them all, they are 7000 people in total now in this battle, next to healthcare workers, whom I also thank, as well as police forces and armed forces and everyone else who is fighting this.
Tents for pre-triage is +14 compared to yesterday, total 669
122 are still the ones in prisons.
The patients who were transferred with the "cross" system is +1 patient, for a total of 60, 23 of which having coronavirus, 37 the others.
Some information: first, I signed an ordnance that allows paying pensions in advance, in our post offices and banks.
Payment is no longer during just one day, but instead they will be across the whole month.
We are working with Minister Boccia, the regional governors, and the Minister of Finances, to conclude the creation of a task force of 300 doctors which will support regions who require them
Shortly, we will announce signing this ordnance, likely by tonight.
I want to reiterate what we said during the past few days: the commissioner of civil protection do not requisition materials destined to the regions, it would be an in-fight, and it is not happening, even though the web has talked about that.
I also want to deny that our department (why our department?) is preparing "bio-containment conditions" in the whole of the country by April. These are fake news, and people responsible must be punished.
[Wow...]
Now prof. Bernabei will speak, then we'll have questions.
(Bernabei) I can only go back to the analysis by the ISS that Borrelli cited. It's crucial, because the files that have been analyzed about the first 355 deceased: 3 of them (0.8%) had NO comorbidities; everyone else had 1, 2, or 3 comorbidities: respectively 25%, 25% and 48%
That tell us how the data point, which is important on one hand, and takes a snapshot of reality on the other, shows that having old age but also pathologies like diabetes, atrial fibrillations, and others, let the virus find a more fertile, more fragile ground.
I think this is the snapshot that explains the excess of mortality, since it has been repeated several times, we are the second oldest country in the world: out average age of cases is 63, in China that was 46 years of age.
(Borrelli) Thank you, now taking questions.




Q: If i counted well, 5 regions have 77% of the sick; the percentage of the dead is 90% in these regions. Can this be explained scientifically? Secondly, Prof. Lopalco of Pisa talked today of the possibility of a very long epidemic, with restrictive measures only being lifted in the summer. Is this plausible?
A: about the second part, anything is possible, we don't know yet until we have a full evaluation of the peak of this pandemic, we can't calculate this for now. I haven't seen these calculations that you saw, I don't know how truthful they might be.
Q: Today [someone] proposed to give a pulse oxymeter to anyone in self-isolation, to find out about shortness of breath early. Is this a useful proposal to intervene before it's too late?
A: Certainly, anything that used to be called "remote medicine", today often termed "technical assistance", the pulse oxymeter is a tool that works, although there are technicalities that are not easy to implement, such as a 24/7 center that monitors the single pulse oxymeters.
It tends to be easier to do for individual realities than on a wide basis. But there is no doubt technological measures wshould be used.
Q: In the past few days we saw that some regions have implemented measures of their own, more stringent than the central government, in particular today we have that supermarkets have been limited to closing at 90, and we've been seeing queues become much longer. Do you think this is to be encouraged or not?
A: I think the measures taken until now with the import of the scientific committees were the appropriate ones; if locally there are more things worth implementing, I have nothing to say on that.
Q: Today 4670 are the positives, but the recoveries are only 263. This number, considering the self-isolation number is rising, is it caused by low availability of hospital beds? How can we look at this data?
A: I don't know... this could be true, but I only see 200 cases today more than yesterday.
(Borrelli) If I may, we look at the numbers every day, and we haven't had issues with being able to hospitalize people.
The ones who are at home are either asymptomatic, or only mildly symptomatic, and does not require hospitalization.
I must make this clear because if someone NEEDS hospital assistance, we find solutions, including moving people to other regions.
(Prof.) Same here, for now we've always found solutions.
Q: The percentages as said earlier, if we sum Lombardy and Emilia-Romagna, that's 60-70%. Have we found an explanation? We talked about excess use of anti-inflammatories or NSAIDs... it's been a few days sine the restrictive measures, people have "fled" towards southern regions, but those two regions are still at the top. What is the hypothesis?
A: there could be many answers to this, and we do not have a crystal ball. I think it's more interesting to notice that the level of infections in the center-south is still limited, which means containment measures are working, because where clusters were small, they remained small. Of course where there were very many patients, things are still explosive.
But we only have 200 new cases more than yesterday, which I think is significant. I don't have a fuller answer.
Q: Today Prof. Carli(?) said in an interview that there are many asymptomatic people in self-isolation, and they risk infecting their relatives, and this way the epidemic doesn't end. Have you considered a quarantine in hotels or military structures?
(Borrelli) We gave indications about this to regions and municipalities.
There is also an issue with homeless people, or people who live in homes where adequate self-isolation cannot be guarantees.
Local realities, regions and municipalities, are the ones with the ability to intervene on this.
We must ensure that those people who must be in a period of quarantine are allowed to isolate themselves.
Q: About mortality again, we see in other countries like Germany, the number of deaths is much lesser compared to the cases. Let me compare that with Lombardy today: +44 ICU compared to yesterday, and +381 died. Are we dying more because we cannot find ICU beds in Lombardy?
(Prof.) No, no, we don't see that. And how are these numbers being calculated? Who's being defined as "dead from what"?
If in Germany they say people died from "interstitial pneumonia" instead of COVID, sure, they'll have few COVID deaths.
Probably, when this ends and we can do a real post-hoc analysis, we'll understand these issues.
For now it's a blind shot.
Q: but about ICUs, we keep hearing interviews from doctors who say they must select patients, triage.
A: what we are told is that when hospitals are too taxed they use the "cross" system, which has always worked. There are no problems from our point of view.
It's obvious that ICU beds are all taken up and work is very much ongoing, but I don't think we have had information about complete lack of availability.
Q: A question for you...
(Prof.) I am not... I must clarify, the Commissioner is Arcuri, but...
Q: So, "Mr Head of Department", today you basically moved the peak to two weeks from now. If this movement were confirmed, if you can confirm it now, de facto the predictions that were made before have been proven false. The measures that have been adopted... we can conclude they didn't work so well?
A: No, I thought I should highlight something that has been told to me by experts: we'll never know when the peak is. Rationally, based on the measures taken, we are guessing next week or the one after, but there isn't a scientific datum. There are trends which must be verified.
Q: [inaudible]
A: In my opinion, the measures taken gave results.
The number of new cases are due to virus circulation that occurred before the restrictive measures, which will help us stop the virus circulating.
(Prof.) Also consider it's been about 10 days. We must wait at least two weeks to mathematically model some data, but two weeks are the minimum required.
Q: Since you were talking about PM Conte's statement he'd like to introduce more resstrictions... have you suggested more specific punishments for violations? This seems to be missing at this point. Secondly, do you have data about beds and ICU beds in the less-hit regions so far?
A: (Borrelli) We started with 5400 ICU beds in Italy, and now, we have around 8000. I don't have the exact number but that's about it, and they are still growing, as have the beds in pneumology, and other specialized wards.
About sanctions and fines, as the Civil Protection we just do our activities... the political decisions are left to the PM and the government.
Q: something that's two questions in one: Zaia, the government of Veneto, says he's very worried about the presumed new Verona cluster, which is occurring despite the containment measures, and it's hard to contain at this point, so the virus is still expanding... and here in Latium, we found a cluster too... some nuns have been infected from being in hospitals... I know we aren't at the peak and everything is limited in the center-south... but?
<twomoon> pneumology = pulmonology (?)
A: Well, the idea that the next few days may see more clusters is not something that would surprise me, but the important thing is to immediately take actions to limit them.
What's fundamental is to see what happens two weeks after the containment measures.
twomoon, probably thanks
Q: In the US, apparently we sent 500 tests there. Without going political, can we really export tests? DO we have enough?
A: we bought 390000 tests, which are being distributed to the regions. We don't have a critical situation, except for some regions which didn't have enough... if we have enough to export them, it seems that's fine
Q: [missed] more contagion has been registered. Is it wrong to consider the Veneto cluster "extinguished"?
A: We can have unforeseen clusters, but still, one is better than 100.
[?!]
(Borrelli) Thanks and good evening.
[Note: I believe we exported 500000 tests, or rather swabs, and not 500]
