Lombardy's numbers: +1598 new cases, 6826 tests made, +345 deaths for a total 8656. ICUs down -55, total 1326.
Apparently, Lombardy governor Fontana said "Starting tomorrow, people who are outdoors in Lombardy will wear masks". This is just from a RAI headline currently on TV, though, so I don't know whether he's making them mandatory or what's he even thinking
Source: https://milano.repubblica.it/cronaca/2020/04/04/news/coronavirus_lombardia_aggiornamenti_ordinanza_regole_mascherine-253134766/

Also, ATM (Milan's public transport company) is evaluating programming the turnstiles to only allow a limited number of people inside each metro train.
Source: https://milano.repubblica.it/cronaca/2020/04/04/news/coronavirus_milano_trasporti_atm_bilancio_comune-253086384/



Transcription of Italy's daily Civil Protection press conference at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rRjoUcOpLo4 on April 4



Good evening. Thanks to Professor Locatelli, from ISS, who is here today.
88274 currently positive, +2886 since yesterday.
3984 are in ICU, and I want to remind you that today, for the first time, we have a very important data point: the number of ICU patients goes down -75. This is important because it allows our hospitals to "take abreath", and it's the first time this number is negative.
People hospitalized with symptoms are 29010, while most of the positives, 52270, are at home in self-isolation.
Unfortunately, +681 new deaths, but this value is constantly reducing; on March 26 we reached a peak with +969.
20996 total recoveries, +1238.
114 patients have been transfered from Lombardy, 75 with COVID-19, 40 are other patients. 38 were transferred to German ICU beds, and we thank Germany again for this.
As of today we have 17363 volunteers, still growing.
There are 811 pre-triage tents outside of hospitals, and 151 in prisons.
We have obtained €105.5 million in donations.
I'd also like to remind you 13 doctors and 17 paramedics have arrived from the Ukraine, who will operate in the region of Marche.
We also received a large equipment donation from Egypt, so I'd like to thank these countries, which add to the others who have shown generosity towards our country.
Now, Dr. Locatelli.
(Locatelli) It would be easy to start talking about the largely encouraging data Dr Borrelli mentioned about decreases in ICU use and deaths.
But it's like to start and end today with two remarks. Today one of PM Conte's personal guards died, and I want to mention this as police forces are another category having an important role together with medical workers. This emergency situation has highlighted these people who work so hard for this country.
The Minister of Health Speranza as well as Commissioner Arcuri reminded everyone how important it is to respect social distancing rules, which are the best 	strategy to contain contagion. The Mayor of Milan has also highlighted that there is an increase in population movement. We must all be warned that behaviors with a high sense of responsibility are the only way we have to honor the memory of our fellow citizens who died.
Looking at the numbers from March 27 up to today, so in 9 days, we went down from more than 120 ICU admissions to a negative number, -74, so we have 74 sick people who are no longer in ICU beds since yesterday. The number of deceased has also gone down from +970 to +680, so this confirms what Dr Borrelli said, but once again, the strong message must be heard that this must not at all be read as a message that the critical phase is over, the danger is over: nothing is over, this is just the demonstration that what we've done has helped.
I've also talked yesterday about the important role of clinical studies in our countries, and I will try to give you some data to detail what I said yesterday: since March 17, about 53 study/trial proposals have been evaluated, and 8 of them have been approved, and consequently, after obtaining the ethical committee's approval, they have begun recruiting patients.
9 studies were presented yesterday which will be rapidly evaluated, but let me remark again how the pharmacological agency AIFA is crucial for conducting studies rigorously: 17 proposals have failed to be approved due to lacking a solid rationale. This shows how serious and rigorous the approach is. Remaining proposals were either withdrawn, or clarifications have been requested.
I'll also spend some words about evaluating face masks proposals: a message may have been sent that needs to be corrected. There is no bottleneck penalizing production of masks, and the ISS (I think Prof. Brusaferro for these days) has analyzed more that 250 proposals, 73 of which were approved for production, and 2 were authorized for putting them into the market.
Again, the agency tasked with evaluating this, in this case the ISS together with INAL, is doing all they can to provide an answer to the problem of producing masks nationally.
I will close with another remark about humanity: it's not just because I am from Bergamo, but I'd like to share with the whole country the unique experience I've lived when I went to Bergamo a few days ago and saw how many extraordinary things the Alpini and the volunteers from Confartigianato achieved: they turned the Fair of Bergamo into a perfectly organized makeshift hospital, which will accept patients starting from Monday, reducing the load on 
Bergamo's main hospital. The same goes for the hospital created in Milan's Fair.
This is a further example of how a profoundly wounded territory has allowed its best assertive forces to emerge, to respond cohesively in a way that can help those who need it. This is the best part of our country, which must make us all be proud of being Italian.
(Borrelli) Before we move to questions, let me also mention Giorgio: my condolensces to his family.



Q: Without trying to force out data that don't exist, I'd like to understand your parameters approximately... What levels must we reach to be able to release some of the measures, and resume some economical activities?
A: You've heard us talk about the R0 index, which we had as a goal to lower around 1. We have reached that value, but now we want to go further: we must reduce R0 below 1, to have evidence that epidemic diffusion has stopped, at least in terms of daily increment, but hopefully it will even decline.
It's worth noting how in regions of Central and Southern Italy, the entire healthcare system has been able to contain the growth of infected people requiring ICU beds, and more tragically, those who died, and this result was not to be taken for granted. It must be highlighted as further demonstrating the efficacy of containment measures... I do realize I am repeating myself, but they must NOT be relaxed.
Many of my colleagues have already said that we'll have to live "together" with the COVID-19 infection for a few more months, and obviously the goal is to reduce the number, and all polices that will be implemented in terms of restarting work activities or releasing social containment measures, while they will be taken by the politicians, they will have to gradually allow the economy to restart gradually, while evaluating epidemiological data, both daily 
numerical evidence and projection models based on serology.
Q: We want the threshold to get below R0=1...?
A: Yes, otherwise we won't completely stop the epidemic.
Q: How can we start a reasoning...?
A: A reasoning has already begun, as planning is an important part of the orientation the scientific committee providing as a guideline for what the political decisions will be, in terms of measures and timing.
Q: I'd like to ask Dr Locatelli whether there is evidence that the recovered people have gained immunity, but also, the news make me need to ask about Lombardy, there is an ordnance that people can only go outside with a face mask or by otherwise covering their face. Is there scientific evidence backing this?
A: (Borrelli) I said yesterday, and I can say it again today, that I don't use a mask because I respect social distancing rules. Masks are important if those are not respected, but Prof. Locatelli will explain better.
(Locatelli) I'll try to answer both questions... So, infection by SARS-COV-2 appeared on the international scene a relatively short time ago, 3 1/2 months at most. We know that people who were exposed to the virus develop an antibody response, and there also a "cell-mediated" response, which is the other big part of our immune system. We give the most value to neutralizing antibodies, because those protect the most against the virus. How long this immune response lasts in time is something we don't know, it will have to be studied.
On using masks, there is a lot of debate within the scientific community itself, because it's a topic where we have no very strong evidence on what you were commenting on. We know that masks are useful to prevent contagion by a subject who already hosts the virus, and in a logic where we assume there are some asymptomatic people who can infect, masks can certainly be useful... but the fundamental measure is respecting social distancing.
Any thoughts on using masks on a wider basis are currently an object of evaluation by the scientific committee; but directions on using masks by healthcare workers and infected people are the same as before.
Q: I seem to understand that you do not feel like extending these measures to other parts of the country?
A: At this time we certainly didn't indicate that.
Q: A question for both of you: measures that are taken within this department must be respected by us, and I hope everyone follows the rules, but I have to submit a particular case: it is a documented case on a foreign 19-year-old person who died, while he was hosted by a family, which did not initially know the cause of death, which was communicated to the other family a few days later. When they inquired with the reference hospital, they asked to make a 
PCR test. How is it possible that a hospital receiving a COVID-19 patient does not notify the family who has hosted him for three months?!
A: (Borrelli) I'll answer, then maybe Prof. Locatelli wants to add something. I don't know this event, but it's clear it must be analyzed and understood, because if things went this way, it's obvious something went wrong in the evaluation. I will see it through.
Q: Aside from studying the curve, is there a chance to understand whether the new positives, like today's one for instance, would those be people who got infected recently, or before the containment measures started? Have you been studying this aspect: "who are" the people who are still getting infected?
A: (Locatelli) We cannot give such a granular analysis of the people who turned out positive on the test, but we can try to interpret things: we do a lot of tests in our country, which is an important data point to highlight because sometimes people have the impression we aren't testing a lot, but we did more than 650k tests. Let's remember there is an incubation period before an individual gets tested. It's obvious the social distancing and lockdown measures implemented across the country have very markedly reduced contagion, without them we'd have had an exponential growth of infected and also deceased people; just as obviously, intra-family infections and infections in nursing homes are also a reason we still have infected subject.
Today, Commissioner Arcuri defined himself as "begging" people to respect the rules: going into the streets, gathering us, that's certainly not something good for individuals or for society. Protecting yourselves means protecting everybody else.
Q: When will serology begin, and have you choosen a test? But also speaking of exponential growth, which was occurring when government decided to lock down... do you have a sense of how many people would have died without that?
A: An authoritative study claims at least 30000 people have been saved, their deaths avoided. But let me give more data to show how the whole dynamics changed within 9 days: on March 27 we had 12% more deaths than the previous day, while today it's 5%. I already mentioned the bare numbers. We had +3% ICU admission, today it's -2%. Total hospitalizations went from +5% to +1% today. These figures speak for themselves.
About the choice of a serology test, we have not done that yet, as we want to have very sensitive and specific data. I want to tell the country very clearly that these studies will start soon, and aside from the choice of a diagnostic test, there is a whole organization and procedural definition of the sample size and methodology, meaning how to define the population that must be investigated, how to obtain the blood sample and transfer it to the labs... in the most agile way to obtain this very important evaluation of how the virus circulates, and what the actual fatality rate is.
This will also inform political deciders on cautiously relaxing social distancing measures and restarting activities.
Q: Are you interacting with doctors from other European countries, like Germany and Sweden? In Berlin, people are being mass sampled, and it appears that way cases can be diagnosed 2 days before they become critical. Then I'm curious: why are we still sending patients to Germany when we have free beds in Italy now?
A: We accepted Germany's offer and we thank them... we accepted their offer when our country was critical, and since now we are changing to negative numbers, we are considering moving patients internally to Lombardy now. But this whole "Cross" system has allowed to lighten the load on ICU wards.
(Locatelli) I'll answer the first question, and I thank you for letting me share with the whole country the fact that Dr Ranieri Guerra, our WHO representative, and the ISS director, had a teleconference with their German counterparts, and they exchanged information usefully to bring us information on optimizing the approach on how to conduct serology tests. Scientific exchange is crucial in medicine, especially in such situations.
Creating a territorial management with "digital health" services will allow managing home patients better.
Q: We have said that R0 went near 1, which is important, but how will we prevent this number from rising again and losing our results when we relax the measures? And about the serology tests you talked about yesterday with the ISS, many Italian regions have already started on their own; will those data be useful or will they not be compatible with the ones you seek?
A: As to your first question, I want to note that R0 was around 3 during the first days of the epidemic. It's obvious that individual responsibility measures will be crucial to keep, and lower, this number, but what we expect is that, since extremely well-pondered choices will be made, we won't ever face values like what we had initially, although there might be local clusters, but what we're doing is creating a system for monitoring these local clusters and introducing correcting measures to immediately stop them.
I'm sorry, I missed... We do want to propose a strategy to conduct with the regions; all those people who will handle these studies want to work with the regions, I want to spell this out clearly, and what we define on the scientific committee should find full cooperation with the regions. Now is not the time for competition or a "race" to finding the best test... it's the time to work cohesively together.
(Borrelli) Thank you everyone.
