https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FP8T_SoeN_8



Good evening, thanks to Prof. Locatelli, the President of the ISS, here.
Today's bulletin:
Recoveries: +952, for a total of 7024
New cases: +3957, for a total of 46378, of which 2683 are self-isolating, and 3000 are in ICU, which is 6% of the total
Unfortunately, +651 deceased.
One comment on the data, before I let Prof. Locatelli speak: today's numbers are lesser than yesterday, and I wish, we all wish, that these numbers can be confirmed in the next few days.
But we must keep our guard high, keep following the lockdown rules.
About our volunteer forces, it's now more than 8000 managing this emergency, it's +1000 compared to yesterday.
Plus we have our medical personnel, and police and armed forces.
Tents installed for pre-triage are 692, +2 from yesterday. Also in prisons, we have +13 for a total of 135.
As of today, a total of 63 patients have been transfered away from Lombardy, +2 compared to yesterday, and 25 of those are positive, while 38 are "no-COVID" patients.
Let me provide a piece of information: we told the press that in our department, 12 of our colleagues are positive.
We immediately did everything required to sanitize the environment, and immediately adopted required measures for our personnel.
Let me thank all the women and men in the Civil Protection, who are all working hard in this emergency, showing a great sense of responsibility and duty, and unique capablities.
It's almost two months we've been here, working 14-15 hours a day, and each one of us worked relentlessly.
I want to thank both them and their families.
I also wish to remind that our collegues who are positive are still working from thier homes, as they are not critical and can continue working remotely.
I want to reassure the country that our structure will continue managing the emergency with all the necessary support and coordination. It's our job that we are proud of.
Thank you for now, Locatelli will speak.
(Locatelli) Thank you Dr Borrelli. Good evening. As he does every evening, he gave you a bulletin of new cases, recoveries and sadly deaths in our countries, who did not make it with the infection. He underlined how, compared to yesterday, there is a data point in a slight decrease.
We don't want to feel relieved too easily, or overestimate this trend, but undoubtedly it's a sign we are noticing, as it also comes at the time distance wrt which we expect to see tangible signs of the efficacy of containment measures.
So on this particular aspect, I'd like to spend an important part of my speech, to underline that after yesterday's PM Conte's speech, we have reached the maximum of what can be restrictive measures, in terms of social and work activities.
What's important now is to highlight another aspect, related to the inter-family contagion, as that is the other big "engine" where virus diffusion can set off.
So, I feel obliged to highlight that it is fundamental, as much as possible, within family contexts, to implement rigorous measures for people who have shown positive.
It's an important sacrifice, but otherwise, we can perpetuate the virus circulating, as it can find further fuel in family contacts.
In this context, and in this perspective, we appeal to the sense of responsibility of more than 20000 of our citizens who are positive, we ask them to limit their contacts in the utmost way.
This is needed to interrupt the transmission chain I mentioned.
A further reflection, which I dedicate to those who unfortunately died: during these days, we have repeated that people over 70 are the ones who pay the harshest toll from the SARS-COV-2 epidemic.
Fragile people are the ones at risk of not getting past the infection. They are our historical roots, our memory, these elderly people must absolutely be protected, and all the measures that have long been suggested enacted.
They must avoid leaving their homes, and if they reside in a nursing home, they must avoid, in this phase, visits that could potentially start contagion.
This is because these structures, like hospitals in general, risk to be an unfortunate way to amplify the events, which runs a concrete risk to make the elderly who die a soaring number.
Almost 84% of the deaths were registered in three regions: Lombardy, which is paying the highest price, especially in some provinces... you know I'm from Bergamo, so you can imagine my own feelings seeing what happens in my province; also, Piedmont, and Emilia-Romagna.
So let me say it as a citizen first and foremost, this is the time when we must again show we are a united country, which can respond AS a country.
Dr Borrelli talked about transferring patients between regions: that's an important mechanism, that as a doctor I wish will be increasingly supported, to relieve the structures that are too taxed in the best way.
[so why +1, +2 a day?!]
I am absolutely sure that one the regions in the most trouble are over the peak, they will definitely reciprocate these favors.
A response of this kind is important, it is the only mechanism to guarantee that Lombard, Piedmontese, E-R structures can assist many of our citizens appropriately, those people who need the best treatment.
If we can give a response as the whole of our country, with concrete regional solidarity, we'll be able to better guarantee adequate treatments.
[I think he's saying: it isn't happening now]
Questions?



Q: You, Professor, are making conclusions from this period, as if we have reached the end of a route, reached the maximum of possible lockdown measures. So we wonder where we are in terms of results... yesterday was an extremely negative day, if you allow me to say. Also I get a notice from surgeon and dentists associations: "doctors must be heroes, but not martyrs".
We must provide fresh doctors to the hospitals that are facing difficulties, but we cannot even guarantee these young doctors appropriate PPEs. 
A: It's not just about making conclusions from the current situation, as if we've reached a scenario that can no longer be changed. I was more focusing on the fact that the prevention measures, from a strictly social and work-life point of view, it's hard to imagine stronger measures.
So, when referring to the second "pillar" of contagion, aside from our general social relationships which includes work activities, now, the attention must be moved to prevention within families.
That's because there are 23000 Italians who are luckily asymptomatic but were documented as positive, and those people can create a mechanism that doesn't allow us to reduce the numbers in the way we need.
I also wish to remind that the earliest stringent lockdown measures were adopted on March 11, so we've always said that we were expecting results, based on the virus replication time and diffusion, substantially after 2-3 weeks.
So the week that is beginning now will be, from this point of view, absolutely crucial, and we expect to finally see signals of inversion of the trends.
I am saying this very clearly, as I want to appeal to the responsibility of all of our citizens; we know perfectly well what meant, means and will mean to impact our lifestyle so importantly... but this is the time to take more willpower and incentive to go on with this policy, to continue with these individual behaviors, because they will allow us to prevent further circulation, and particularly, an enlargement to regions which, as of today, are numerically, for the most part, not in a serious scenario as Lombardy, Piedmont and E-R are.
About the younger doctors: when we considered these options, we obviously all highlighted, all of us deciding, that there is a priority, unavoidable, to secure the health of our young colleagues, but on the other hand, to be able to guarantee their contributions, within a system where the people who already have experience on the field can help them contribute without exposing them to dangers.
Q: I'd like to ask about this "Avigan"(?) that social media are all talking about: this drug, used in Japan, apparently "defeated" the virus. Zaia of Veneto said yesterday that he wants to begin experimentation: do you have evidence that this can hold any hope?
A: Thanks for asking, because once again, I can appeal to everyone's sense of responsibility, in communication too: the whole country must be absolutely certain that the AIFA, and the technical committee, consider and evaluate in the most open way possible all the therapeutic options.
But we must distinguish: one thing is POSSIBLE therapeutic options that must be tested and evaluated (let experimentation happen!), but another thing is claiming certain specific theurapeutics are the solution to COVID-19.
There is a press release, which I wholly share, on AIFA's site, which reconstructs in a perfect manner the understanding of the issue on its whole, and in particular about the drug you were referring to.
Before claiming we've found antiviral therapy solutions, drugs that can modulate the inflamatory response that underlies the most severe symptoms, before we say that, we need undeniable evidence.
Let us have clinical trials, all experimentations that explore therapeutics, but until we have evidence of efficacy, and this is NOT present today, I must recommend caution to avoid generating potentially false hopes that would create frustration.
Q: to the Commissioner, I want to ask about the region of Marche, they required more doctors and nurses, 250 of them, so it's not just Lombardy, there are now other regions without resources, so will the doctors you are recruiting going to other regions than Lombardy too? What kind of people are you selecting?
A: certainly the medical task force we have created will go to other regions too, including Marche, already some dozens of doctors are going there. We are finalizing our selection, and I want to thank everyone who answered our call, there were 723 people responding.
The doctors who are most requested are internists, ICU specialists, pneumologists.
Starting tomorrow we will send the first doctors from this force on the territory, and I also want to remind there are 52 Cuban doctors who are landing in Rome right now, and will soon go to Lombardy, and then we also have some doctors from the Russian Federation, and in the night there will be an important contribution from Russia, and these people will be employed in Lombardy too.
(Locatelli) I want to add to Borrelli's response, just the fact that this department monitors everything every single day, without neglecting any sign of hardship from any region. I mentioned the first three regions with the most deaths, but the other regions are equally important, and our attention is utmost, to prevent them from having hardships too.
That's why I underlined the importance of regions cooperating in solidarity, within a united country, in a mechanism of mutual aid.
This will be the winning card to get out of this, as also individual and familiy sense of responsibility, since contagion cannot be contained only socially and on the workplace.
Q: I asked yesterday how many young patients are in ICU, and I was told there is no exact data. As a doctor, can you tell us something more about what the virus does to young, healthy people?
A: Thank you, this question lets me give a comment as a pediatrician, too, which is my main job which I hope to return to soon.
Up to 20 years or so, as of today, there are no deaths to our knowledge, and neither are there people who have needed ICU beds.
As the total number of people who died, only 1% was less than 50 year old.
So it's clear, and we repeated it many times, that this is an emergency phase during which the elderly must be protected, but without neglecting the role that younger people may play, including children, in terms of circulating the virus.
Children, maybe due to their immune system's ability to form a response to new pathogens after leaving uterus, which may be higher than in elderly people... it's known that elderly people have an immunologically less flexible response.
The studies that, in our country too, which must be clearly stated that are being done, those may help in the future to give a useful therapeutic response in older people too.
But again, only 1% of the deceased were less than 50.
Q: today a 24 year old man died with apparently no comorbidities, but apparently he came to the hospital late, when he was too serious, and he wasn't tested soon enough. Are there even people who don't even make it to the hospital?
A: Yes, from a medical point of view, certainly yes, we highlighted the issue of comorbidities, i.e. having other health issues that create a risk, but unfortunately that does not rule out young and seemingly healthy people can encounter... also because our immune mechanisms can be not efficient enough, or conversely, hyperinflammation may happen, creating life-threatening situations.
That's why I underlined the importance earlier, all the grief notwithstanding for this young person who died, of reducing the congestion in the ER and ventilation facilities in the regions most affected, to offer the best assistance to everyone, and this is why inter-region cooperation is fundamental.
Q: two questions, first, I would like to get confirmation from the government, since there is some confusion on the rules and uniformity of them... this morning, the Union of Biologists (to make a concrete example of the confusion in the entire system) told citizens to follow a specific protocol for entering their homes, which is NOT in accordance with the norms that have been released by the government.
Under this particular protocol, which can be supposed to be reliable, take away your shoes immediately, don't touch anything, put your keys aside, disinfect your pet... so... facing the difficulty in making predictive models, is there a necessity to make these norms more specific, more prudent? And secondly, does the scientific committee and the government consider mass use of tests on random samples of people?
A: What you see projected behind me is the "ten rules" to respect, as it is on these rules that we can count for significant prevention of virus diffusion. If there is, and I doubt it, a contribution from material coming from pets, I think that contribution is marginal at worst. What's important is to continue social distancing. You just have to walk in Rome to see how the whole city has changed.
It's an example of maturity, which I consider important, as it is all but easy.
So let's adopt these measures, let's manage our behaviors with individual responsibility, let's help the state's own response, and we will certainly obtain the results we want.
This is why I've wanted to focus on the technical part this evening, in particular for contagion within families.
(Borrelli) I want to add, to avoid any confusion, the government moved to avoiding confusion and creating rules that are the same for the whole of the country. I'll ask you to go to the government's website, to the Ministry of Health's website... of course, other entities are free in our country to provide other recommendation, but I will ask you to look at official guidance.
About tests...? For what I know, from talking to the scientific committee, the strategy and policy has not changed. We follow the guidelines from the WHO, and those are the ones we'll enact. If they change, then we will also follow them.
(Locatelli) I want to add that we are one of the countries that did most testing in the world, certainly the most in Europe, so the attention in applying procedures to identify viral RNA on nose swabs is absolutely adequate to the indications from the WHO.
Here, too, I will not avoid a question that was perhaps implicit or hidden: I say this in a neutral way, it's clear we are paying attention to what could be alternative tests, ones faster to obtain results... but they need to be validated, or otherwise we risk giving false impressions to the citizens, which would be most unwelcome.
Let's remember that the test just reflects the situation at the time it is made, it doesn't predict what will happen say 4 or 5 days later. We can only proceed sustainably, we have already made a huge effort to add more workers who can solidly and reliably perform these tests: we are not neglecting anything.
Q: if it's true we need 2 weeks to see the first results from the lockdowns... since March 11, there has been a "fleeing" from north to south, and the president of Puglia reported that 15% of the people coming from trains had fever symptoms. Are you expecting a rise in cases in the south? Are you monitoring it somehow?
A: Thanks for this question too... the numbers we have for regions are, today, not indicating a sitaution that's getting out of hand. However, what you asked offers me the chance to highlight that under the same responsibility logic I talked about, family responsibility as well as individual... the workers who will not go to their jobs starting tomorrow, those workers must NOT move from the north to the south of the country: that would indeed risk 
creating another critical situation.
Under this perspective, too, it's important that caring for your loved ones means thinking about their health, particularly if they're elderly.
(Borrelli) We're concluding now, thanks and good evening.
