https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nWArr8QQ32g



Thanks to prof. Villani, the president of the Italian Pediatrics Society, who will focus on coronavirus and children.
We've had questions on that in the past few days, and he'll answer that.
Today we have +415, 4450 recovered
+4380 [unsure] new positives.
2498 of them are in ICU, 8% of the total.
We also unfortunately register +427 deaths
We have 5905 volunteers, +1432 compared to yesterday.
This is witness to the extraordinary effort of our civil society, I want to thank all the volunteers, and the hospital personnel and the armed and police forces.
We have a total of 655 pre-triage tents, +12 compared to yesterday, those are installed at the entrance of hospitals to avoid contagion inside
122 tends in the prisons
The "cross" system to transfer patients between regions, today we have 59 transfered, for a total of 22 coronavirus patients and 37 "ordinary" patients.
A couple of pieces of information: about younger people, who are coming back from Erasmus projects mainly to the Fiumicino airport. Those will be allowed to move on the national territory.
Only ONE relative will be allowed to get them from the airport. They will have to immediately go home to enter self-isolation.
I also want to say that I signed an ordnance a short while ago, which allows having medical prescriptions to simply come in the form of a code, so that citizens won't need to go to their GP to get their prescriptions.
I'll conclude with a request: from many sides we gather that many pets are being abandoned, especially dogs, and this is despicable. There is no transmission being shown possible between dogs and people.
We know the virus can be present in dogs, but that's not a reason to abandon them.
I'll now let Prof. Villani speak.
(Villani) Good evening. Thanks for this opportunity to talk about children: the positive children are just dozens, 300 in the whole of Italy, and for Italian cases the international scenario is confirmed, i.e. there are no fatalities or very serious cases within children.
In managing children at this particular time, we must know this is not a pediatric issue. When and if a child show symptoms, if they are mild, after consulting with the pediatrician, you should decide what to do, but the criterion to worry is the same as before we had coronavirus: if a child shows important problems, they must be brought to the hospital, but otherwise, there is no reason to worry.
Now we'll take questions.
Meanwhile, thanks to our sign language translator.



Q: [inaudible] I wonder if this is seen as a defeat, and despite the heroism of the healthcare system, we've been caught off guard, or is it the age of the Italian population?
Second question, today we have many more new cases: is this a sign the measures didn't work?
A: thanks for the question, which lets me highlight how good the healthcare system is here: there is a definition of cause of death that lets us diagnose accurately. It's also well known, as a positive fact in our healthcare system, that we can obtain some data that few other countries have available. It's also a matter of diagnostic accuracy: this is a serious virus that concerns mainly vulnerable people.
In this period we do our best to determine whether a fatality was positive or not to the virus.
Look, internationally, everybody is imitating our model. After initial perplexities, all the countries are getting oriented towards "the Italian model", and we can be proud of that.
About the peak... there's certainly a curve, thanks to the ISS which I think, that we monitor very well. Clearly we have data that lets us be up to date; they are important data that we observe, and we need time to evaluate the peak. What we can say with certainty is that the measures taken guarantee obtaining the results we wish for, as long as citizens strictly respect the rules.
Not leaving home except for important reasons, respect distance, wash your hands... Italy will get past this challenge.
Q: I'd like to ask Dr Borrelli, which measures for healthcare are being taken in the centers that gather migrants? Many of those realities are very crowded.
Borrelli answers: they are much less crowded currently than at other times previously. The Immigration Department had a prevention attitude from the start: there are measures that guarantee social distancing, with a set of cautionary rules, I was talking about it just yesterday with the head of the department.
Q: so there have been no clusters or emergencies in those places?
A: no, I have no knowledge of such cases.
Q: What about the migrants outside of those centers, there are about 50k people estimated to be homeless. There are many police reports for people who leave their homes, but what about them? What solutions are being adopted?
Borrelli answers: places for homeless people must be created, I said this from the start. They must be created by the municipalities and by the regions, I've talked about it with the mayor of Rome, Raggi, and they are working with the social services to find places to host those people, especially those who need self-isolation.
We can also requisition or simply acquire hotel structures from local realities, which will be reimbursed later.
We definitely must plan for assistance to these people.
Q: About technical equipment, and gloves in particular, can you clarify, since there was a statement today: doctors say that protection by gloves isn't practically helpful, as gloves get reused and they end up using dirty gloves.
A: Let me be clear on all of the PPEs, gloves and not. Everyone has understood we are living an extraordinary time of emergency, and we beg the population to only use PPEs when really necessary. They must be prioritized towards doctors and nurses, and you all know how hard they are to acquire.
First, keep them to people who need them.
Second, use them as required: reusing gloves is stupid, and using masks when not needed also.
We are all making efforts to obtain materials which are extremely hard to obtain, so it must be used intelligently.
Q: About the statements by Fontana, who asks for doctors from less burdened regions than Lombardy...?
A: we are making plans to support Lombardy, and you will see there will be developments in the coming hours, which will be communicated to you soon.
Q: Zaia, in Veneto, had a private printer "print" some tens of thousands masks, which come with "Veneto" written on them. Are these masks actual PPEs, really useful and protective, or since they are printed by a private printer, which usually prints books, are they to be considered unhelpful?
Where are we with masks? The decree has been signed, but many loads of them are stuck at Customs.
There is a distinction to be made between surgical masks and FFP2/3 masks, which must be used by healthcare workers.
Then there are other types of masks, which are useful to avoid droplet diffusion... the decree that was signed the other day allows for producing and using masks that limit droplet diffusion, but are not fit for the purposes of healthcare workers. They are usable by the general public, but if they are, distance must still be respected. It's just a small addition compared to wearing nothing.
[inaudible]
Yes, I am in contact with the head of Customs about this: if we find masks that are stuck at Customs, obviously they cannot remain there. If they have to go to hospitals or nursing homes, they must be sent there immediately.
If they are for other uses, then they will be evaluated on a case by case basis, and if necessary, we will requisition them.
Some lots have already been requisitioned, especially for Lombard hospitals.
Q: On tests, prof. Rezza said some days ago that some regions are undertesting: can the civil protection department, with the "cross" system, help the regions that are having difficulties with this?
Yes, we bought 390000 tests that are being distributed to all regions.
We'll buy more if they prove to be needed.
Q: I'd like to ask a question about shortages on drugs, which AIFA also reported: are you aware whether hospitals are starting to lack medicine stocks, and if so, how can that be remedied?
A: we don't have any explicit data on this, but it's undeniably a complex emergency, and COVID is not the only disease around, clearly people still get sick from other diseases. We have the utmost attention and are doing what we can.
Q: [inaudible]
Sure, the AIFA website is witness to the fact this issue is being cared about, individually and as a whole.
It goes the same as for PPEs: they must be used carefully and with the utmost care, only when needed. The guidelines must be followed, including protocols for assisting COVID patients, what we must attempt to do is to follow AIFA directions.
Q: In particular, since we had a go-ahead on experimenting the anti-rheumatoid medication on 130 patients, and now this experimentation is also taking place in Spallanzani, but they are complaining that they cannot start experimenting if they do not HAVE the drug.
A: look, clearly there are times to solve this, we hope they will be the shortest possbile.
Before ending the press conference, let me thank all of the pediatricians who assist children.
Thank you.
