March 24 Civil Protection press conference in Italy https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BEEYxhaMcV4



(Borrelli) Good evening everyone. Today's bulletin.
Recoveries: +894, total 8326
New cases: +3612, total 54030
Of these, 28697 are self-isolating, and 3993 are in ICU (6%)
We sadly see +743 deaths.
I'd like to end this press conference, for what concerns me, by wishing Guido Bertolasio my best wishes as he has been hit by the coronavirus.
I'll let Franco speak now.
(Franco) I also wish Dr Bertolaso the best.
I'd like to summarize three points: the duration of containment measures, because on some media there were "news" that let people interpret them as being continued by default until the end of July.
Absolutely not. The current expected duration of containment measures is April 3, and in the days immediately previous to that we will decide whether or not to continue.
Secondly, I'd like to say how much is being done to provide valid treatment to the sick.
Three aspects of that: first, the agreement protocol between the Latium region and the Ministries of Research and Health, to plan towards developing and validating clinically a vaccine that would be able to provide protection against SARS-COV-2.
This will be an important step underlining the effort of all of the country's institutions towards finding the most appropriate responses.
Second, about offering the best therapeutic solutions, the AIFA agency is still, with a valuable effort, evaluating all the proposals coming in.
And what they have identified as the course for submitting clinical protocols, and transferring of them to a single national committee, has the purpose to make approval of therapeutic protocol faster.
We have reached timing that was unimaginable before.
So having a single committee is an element of strength, and not a bottleneck like some said.
Rather, a reflection can be made on compassionate use: clearly, that will be evaluated by local ethical committees.
Third reflection: the workers who are able to diagnose this infection, by March 20 they have been increased by (or to?) 77, and there is an evaluation right now for diagnostic approach, still based on identifying the viral DNA, which is the "golden standard", which may let the times to test shorter.
This also tells you how the "country system" is doing its best to respond to the diagnostic question as quickly as possible.
Last though for today, let me have it be about all the doctors and nurses working in contact with these patients. They are an extraordinary example of solidarity within this country, some of our colleagues have lost their life to save as many as possible.
The thought of all Italians goes to them, as does my dearest memory and thanks.
Thanks to everyone.
Q: Dr Borrelli, based on your statement, as reported in today's interview, the situation about new cases isn't really what we discuss today at 18:00 every day, but really of more than 600000 people, much more than exponential! My direct question, what are we here talking about these data at all, if they are not the real data?!
[Wow!]
A: Absolutely... my answer was within a more ample discussion, when we were talking about asymptomatic people. There are various ideas on that. Some people think it's more, some it's less. I didn't say that's the exact number. It's empirical, coming also from my collaborators, among three of them we found positive asymptomatics, for example.
We'll stop the conference here because at 18:20 the President of the Council of Minister will speak.
Thanks.

[...]

I will try to explain what Dr Borrelli said, in a correct way, but: what comes to be as being identified by the tests is symptomatic/somewhat-symtpmatic patients
There is a concrete possibility... but it's hard to establish the order of magnitude of asymptomatic patients who "escape" identification.
So, whether it's 2x, 4x, 10x, that's much harder.
Certainly there is a portion of subjects, not patients since they are asymptomatic, which could have the virus in their throat but do not get identified.
Second question... no, we must end right now.

[PM speech followed]
