Italy's Civil Protection press conference from April 30 is at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jD0SYCkmYO4 and this is the last one scheduled.




(Borrelli). Good Evening. Prof. Luca Richeldi is here with me today.
Today we have the highest number of recoveries, +4693, since the start of the emergency, total 75945.
105463 total cases, +1872.
Currently positive are 101551, -3106.
1694 are in ICU, -101, and 18149 are hospitalized, -1061.
Most people affected are self-isolating at home, 81708 (80%).
There are +285 victims.
You can see we're headed towards a new phase, and so we have decided to end our periodic press conferences with today's one.
We will still provide updates, and I want to summarize this past period.
We declared a state of emergency, and our volunteers have helped check people in ports and airports when they were still open.
Thanks to the Air Force we have worked to ensure our fellow citizens in Wuhan and on the Diamond Princess could come back to Italy.
We have built temporary healthcare structures in Bergamo, and international organizations helped build one in Cremona.
Another important activity has been the "Cross" system, which moved 116 patients between regions, and 38 to Germany. I want to thank the German authorities for allowing us to lighten the load on Lombardy.
We experiened a lot of generosity from European and non-European countries, which sent us equipment, doctors and other health workers.
Our Civil Protection volunteers are still working. A new form of volunteering has also been important, with task forces including doctors, nurses and socio-sanitary operators, 1000 of which are still leaving to our prisons, and 500 to our nursing homes. Many of these volunteers are contacting me after their term ends, asking me how to stay within the Civil Protection.
Since the start of the emergency we have obtained 142 million euros in donations, used for purchasing PPEs and medical equipment, and 6 million euros were gathered on a bank account in the favor of relatives of victims of healthcare workers who died during the emergency.
Lastly, I want to thank you, journalists and media workers, who have worked to provide information to our citizens, for your presence here. I want to thank RAI in particular for making our press conferences' live signal available to all other media.
Our website https://protezionecivile.gov.it will have more information.
(Richeldi) Thank you Dr Borrelli. Today's data are very comforting, as we see that all indexes are going in the right direction: we witness a decrease of 3000 in currently positive patients, and almost 5000 released from hospitals. We have many regions with no deaths or few deaths, which confirms that the measures enacted drastically reduced pressure on the healthcare system.
If we look at the past 15 days (which will represent an important timeframe from now on, because that's the timeframe that lets you see at effects of our measures, including their relaxation now) we are seeing ICU and hospitalizations are going down considerable. This trend, we've seen day by day, sometimes without trying to look too much into the numbers for a principle of caution, is clearly going in the right direction now.
The system is testing many more people nowadays, which you know is crucial to contain the spread of the virus.
The ratio of positive tests has gone below 3%, which is considered a crucial threshold to determine enough tests are being performed.
This is not the end of the story, as contacts must be searched and tested... but today's picture is comforting: the spread is slowing, pressure on the hospital system has gone down, and we are readier and more aware of the challenge we face in the next months.
(Borrelli) Okay, we'll take questions now.




Q: From May 4 on, there will be many people travelling on trains and airplanes. Are you worried?
A: I think... absolutely not. We need sense of responsibility, travel must happen only when there is a real need, and while respecting social distancing. If we all respect hygienic and gathering rules, we'll be able to manage the situation.
Q: What is your personal view of the emergency in summary? What has it felt like for you, from both a human and a technical viewpoint?
A: We'll no longer meet in these press conferences, and I'm a bit sorry about that, because it had become sort of a familiar thing. We've certainly lived a never-before-seen experience, and in my 18 years at the Civil Protection I had never lived such an intense and growing emergencies. We have several confirmations: our healthcare system has made the difference, and out Civil Protection system has shown a great ability to work as a team.
(Richeldi) For me it was a new experience, I came to Rome three years ago, after an experience in England, so I'm relatively new to the environment... it was certainly a complex experience, but I discovered three things: there are impressive skills in some of our institutions like the Superior Institute of Health (ISS) and INAIL.
Secondly, I met colleagues who are both knowledgeable and humble, who have never assumed they knew everything, but always had doubts.
Thirdly, I experienced a lot of pressure, but also a lot of understanding, by the press and the media, which I think played a crucial role and will continue to do so.
Q: We saw a Chinese study today on Nature showing that out of 285 patients, they all developed antibodies. This is great news, but how long will the immunity last?
A: We do not know how long it lasts. The study is important, first because it's published on a very important publication, and second it gives some very clear results: as you said, they all developed measurable antibodies. This is the prerequisite to develop protective immunity. We do not automatically know it IS protective immunity, but we can presume so. As you know, an important seroprevalence study is taking place in Italy, but that study also tells us another important thing: in the majority of patients, the response to this virus is sustained and measurable within peripheral blood, so it will be at least an instrument to easily measure prevalence of the virus, and it will offer at least a minimum of protection in case of reinfection.
Q: I notice that today only 5 regions have more than 100 new cases. This is good, but shouldn't the scientific committee have suggested measures like the ones in Spain, which are differentiated by province? We've chosen the route of "everywhere the same", but why are other countries making different choices? Also, I was positively struck by the high number of recoveries, more than 4000... but we're still told no drugs have been found that can effectively treat COVID. So, how are we curing people who recover?
A: The matter of regionalization of measures has been discussed, not just within the committee, but also internationally... the matter is very complex, because we must consider various aspects, both legal and logistical, but also scientific: as an example, in theory, a higher percentage of people who are immune makes those people more protected to a new outbreak, while in a region where the virus barely circulated there will be many "naive" individuals, meaning with no immunity.
So it's a balance that has to be considered. Since we are one nation, I think there have to be generalized decisions, but there can be small variations, think of red zones, which we had and likely will have again: they are local measures where virus circulation is different.
There shouldn't be a 100% national or 100% regional approach, but they must be mixed with common sense.
It would be good to also have a super-national approach: at least 3 or 4 countries that took different routes from us have a number of deaths higher than Italy.
Then, on therapies: as doctors, we are getting experienced on these patients, which we had never seen before. They had these pneumonias and all parameters out of control... today we have more knowledge and some encouraging drugs, like remdesivir, although two studies, one Chinese and one American, gave slightly contrasting results... our approach is more conservative, but I think most of the answer to your question lies in a prompter diagnosis, more awareness, and "calmer" management by the hospitals.
I think all these things together explain what you called a good news. For the future, it can be a reachable goal to have more effective treatments.
Q: In the past week there have been various position statements about lack of assistance to self-isolating patients at home. Since many are lamenting the difference between regions, I wonder if you have considered, scientifically or legally, to coordinate this at a central level.
A: We must dinstinguish between healthcare and other kinds of assistance. I think in the Minsiter's plan there is a strong enhancement of territorial medicine, and we must have this as a goal, "proximity healthcare"... while as to other forms of assistance, I want to remind that our Civil Protection volunteers are always available, and there are also other forms of volunteering that have been created to provide further support in the territory. We are working on a proposal for supporting municipalities, which was discussed yesterday in the regional conference. Shortly we'll see further form of social cooperation enhancement.
(Richeldi) The national healthcare system has set itself up for assistance to the sick. Territorial medicine will have new patients in their care as well as contact tracing, and this is why we need a large increment in people who will have to work on this. Let's not forget that we have "COVID hospitals", which are structures dedicated, prepared to take in these patients; there is one or more of them in each region. All regions are also getting equipped for intermediate structures, which have often been found in hotels, to guarantee isolation of people who are infected but do not need hospitalization. Internationally, these structures are already consider essential for proper management, and we are getting equipped with these structures that are intermediate between family and hospital.
Q: As a pneumologist, Prof. Richeldi, are the consequences on the lungs for people who have faced this disease starting to become clear? And as a member of the committee, today the PM talked about possibly re-opening kindergartens and summer centers for kids, but the ISS has shown some perplexities on the matter. How did the scientific committee evaluate this? I also ask because the report that was delivered to the government does not contain this measure.
A: The first question is simpler. There are consequences on people's lungs: we'll have a cohort of patients with pulmonary fibrosis, which may become a new category of patients with respiratory insufficiency. We are working with the ISS to have a model for follow-up of these patients, which represent a new health issue, not just on the lungs since they can also have other problems, but we are already working with these patients.
On kindergartens, I have read it on the media, and I cannot say why PM Conte said this, but I imagine it's a typical example of the time when a politician puts the scientific data on a balance with social needs: I assume opening kindergartens doesn't mean opening all the other schools, which is what our models shows as unsustainable. I think opening kindergartens can help families who are now going back to work, to attenuate the impact of the issue. I 
wouldn't be too worried if this measure were adopted, with a minimal impact but a large social benefit.
Q: About Kawasaki(?) syndrome, which has been said to have had an anomalous spike in children in northern Italy... what is it, and is there a reason to worry? One of the few good things during "phase 1" was that children seemed unaffected.
A: You're right. I can confirm the data: children have a lesser chance of being infected with COVID. this is solid data. As to the Kawasai syndrome, it's rare, serious, and known, and there have been some indications of an increase in some places, quite possibly related to increase in SARS-CoV-2.
In Italy, the pediatric hospital network has activated for active surveillance on this syndrome. For the time being, there is no reason for alarm, as there are few confirmed cases... if anything is true in this, the network will let us know soon.
Q: I'd like to understand something I think is fundamental for "phase 2": private serology tests, very many citizens are getting tested privately. Is there a protocol in case they test positive? They should get a swab at that stage. Aside from this, is it possible to get private swabs? I think it's happening on a large scale, but non-transparently, with a risk that some people can get it privately very quickly, while others wait months with public healthcare.
A: I understand Prof. Brusaferro hasn't replied to your question previously, or the matter would be solved...?
Q: Well, he told me we must work on it.
A: Oh, well!
Q: But it's been a month and a half these tests have gone on, I haven't been able to ask him a follow-up question on whether there is a protocol: can swabs be done privately, and if not, why are they being done?
A: This is not my realm but I'll try to answer as best as possible... Serology, I've also noticed there has been a "boom" in testing, which is good on the one hand but not so good on the other, partly because some of these tests are not very reliable at all. Every test has a given percentage of false positives and negatives. We're trying to use the best tests available, which use ELISA or CLIA techniques; the Chinese study was done with the latter, and these are reliable tests. Your question goes further: if I test reliably, and the test tells me I do have IgG for SARS-CoV-2, what must I do, do I have to get swabbed? There is not yet a protocol on this, but that kind of test doesn't aim to see if there is viral RNA in the body at that particular time. It's something we're learning about, and I think this study that is starting with a sample of 150000 Italians with reliable tests will give us real answers. I think that may have been why Prof. Brusaferro was cautious, as we'll have good results soon.
I don't know what to tell you about private swabs... I have no information, but I know the Ministry of Health and the ISS are monitoring these activities, so I think if there's some labs in convention with healthcare to run those tests, that's legitimate. At this time I don't know if any were authorized, but I assume it's a viable hypothesis to boost testing in the future.
(Borrelli) Okay. Well, thank you all then, and see you... next time.
