https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pzfgcvdOeks



+727 fatalities
16847 recoveries total, +1118
103 patients moved from lombardy, +7
total positive: 80572, +2937
4035 in ICU, 28403 in hospital, 48134 (60%) at home
[Some patients transfered to Germany but i missed the number]
12986 volunteers are available total
786 pre-triage tents, 151 in prisons
[Today unless i've somehow missed (but i don't think i have) they have not stated the delta of positives at all, even in their usual tricky way that subtracts recoveries and deaths]


Q: the scientific committee is considering giving children one hour outside each day. isn't that... going counter the advice to stay home?
A: what the ministry actually said refers to currently existing restrictions, so those aren't being changed, they're just pointing out what you can do
the scientific committee haven't deliberated anything, but it's okay to start considering a number of possible situations for the future, and listen to the complaints from various associations
Q: we've talked about reaching the peak since about two days, but can we really talk about a peak? i say this because for instance in Sicily, they're starting to prepare for Easter communally, while authorities say to stay home or we'll start counting deaths in Sicily too
A: you all (journalists) can help us tell people that nothing changed since the last emergency home: stay home, it must be clear to everyone. we can wish that something will change in the future, but when that happens there will be a new law.
"are we at the peak or not?" is an argument that does not interest me. the situation is, although it's not reassuring to say it, of an emergency, like a war, and we must strictly respect the restriction
we have a constitution that says we must protect health as a primary good
Q: there's little more than 200 new hospitalized today, same with ICU. is the situation objectively improving, or is it more that strategies for hospitalization are changing? is it now the time to make regions with less difficulties help the regions in trouble?
A: these data can be interpreted as affirming the route taken is good. it confirms we must continue in that direction. they are signals that are evaluated carefully, and which represent what we wished for, but we must not relax anything.
Q: you said ffp2 masks that were delivered today were for regular people, not doctors... why? the population doesn't need ffp2, do they?
also Q: why are tests not being made on certain people who are ill? are they just considered "certainly covid patients" without even testing?
A: about the masks, it said on the packaging "FFP2, KN95" but in reality they were not FFP2 masks, so in reality they are okay for the general population but not for doctors. this is why we apologized to the Union of Medical Doctors, and we will deliver actual FFP2 masks in the coming days.
answer about tests: they are done only when there are apparent symptoms, shortness of breath, and under this view, there can be mildly symptomatic people who don't get tests.
doctor says: yes, we can reassure that tests are definitely done for people who need it. if you are denied a test, it means you don't need it.
doctor says in response to Q: having just fever is not enough to qualify for getting tested. there are phone numbers to call, and you can call your GP, and if the GP sees conditions justifying testing (like shortness of breath), they can decide on testing
Q: doctors say "we must decide who to save", so i'm afraid that the smaller number of people in ICUs may not be positive, but simply show we're out of bed. does it?
A: i have no information saying that people who needed ICU have been unable to get it
add-on A: ICU beds are not needed for just a couple of days for COVID patients, they need these beds for 2-4 weeks, so it's very important to keep the restrictions or ICUs can become a problem again
