Italy's PM Conte press conference at 20:20 CET November 4: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4GP58_BL7sw

[...] the numbers of asymptomatics... the number of people going to ICU is going down, but global numbers are constantly going up and there is a high probability of exceeding resources in many regions in the next few weeks.
We must intervene. Today we have a curve monitoring plan based on 21 parameters, which can indicate how to intervene in localized and specific measures.
If we introduced measures that are the same countrywide, we'd produce a doubly negative effect: on the one hand we might adopt measures that are not adequately effective for the regions at higher risks, and on the other hand we may introduce unreasonably restrictive measures where the situation is less serious.
That is why we are dividing the peninsula into three areas: yellow, orange and red. These measures will go into effect on Friday: I've wanted to postpone them by a day to give everybody time to arrange things.
The yellow areas are less critical. In these regions people will be banned from moving between 22:00 and 5:00. We recommend to limit movements even during the day except for necessities.
On weekends and holidays, shopping malls with close with limited exceptions.
We're closing museums and there will be remote learning in high school, except for students with disabilities and labs.
Until middle school, however, there will still be in-presence schooling. University classes will happen remotely.
Public transport will have to limit capacity to 50% except for school-related transport.
Bars and restaurants remain open until 18:00 and take-away can happen until 22:00 while there are no restrictions for deliveries.
Now the orange areas, with medium-high risk: Puglia and Sicily are in this area, additionally to the other restrictions, people won't be allowed to move between regions and municipalities except for necessities that must be proven.
In these regions we are also closing bars and restaurants, which can only operate for take-away until 22:00 and deliveries.
Red area regions have a high risk, and these are Calabria, Lombardy, Piedmont and Aosta Valley: here any movement is banned even within one's own municipality, at any time, except for necessity. So, obviously, it is not allowed to move between regions and municipalities.
Bars and restaurants are also closed as above, but in addition, most shops will close, except for pharmacies, groceries, hairdressers, and laundry.
In public jobs, anything that can be done remotely will have to be.
Schools will close except up to the first year of middle school. We have wanted to keep the first year open to let these students know each other and their new teachers.
Public and private exams are suspended, with exceptions including medical and civil protection.
All sporting competitions are suspended, except for those identified as essential by CONI.
Physical activity outdoors will only be allowed individually.
You may have noticed there are no "green areas": there are no regions that can remain out of these measures, as the pandemic is occurring everywhere. All these measures will be effective from Friday. The Minister of Health will provide updates on the conditions of the regions, which will not be arbitrary, but will depend on periodic monitoring that is done by ISS representatives, the Ministry of Health, and representatives of the regions.
If a region goes back to more stable, less risky conditions for at least 14 days, some of its restrictions may be lifted, and we all wish that to happen.
The indicator parameters that we use must be accessible to the scientific community and to all citizens.
We have no alternative: we must enforce these restrictions to limit the curve. We understand the psychological suffering, but we must keep strong, and we are already at work to mitigate the consequences on economy.
We will soon publish a new law-decree, which will include measure to automatically give money directly on bank accounts of entities and people impacted by the measures.
We must be in this together and support each other. Thank you.
Questions now.



Conte: just let me... I said no movement from 21:00 for yellow area regions, but it's actually from 22:00.

Q: Are red areas only at the regional level, or can single provinces within a yellow area region be upgraded to red? And what about other subjects like the emergency stability funds, and the voting law?
A: The monitoring has been built on a province basis too. But the further we go with granularity, the more attention must be paid, but under certain conditions that justify different treatments within regions, abstractly, we do have the mechanisms to establish that. But the strength of the whole mechanism is substantially regional.
As to the other question, I have not been asked by any political force to "reshuffle" the government, and with the critical situation that the country is facing, I think this is not a subject that citizens or even politicians care much about.
Tomorrow I will meet the leaders of the majority parties, and we will evaluate priorities.
Handling the pandemic takes up a lot of our time, but we must also debate other themes.

Q: You reminded us that this mechanism is based on a series of parameters that was created in October, and this system was meant to be enforced "automatically", but in these past few hours there has been a confrontation with the regions, which have wanted more say. So is this mechanism automatically, or do the regions have a say? My other question is about visiting relatives: is it allowed, when and how, especially in the higher-risk areas?
A: You touched on many subjects... let's start from the first: there has been a lot of debate with the regions throughout the pandemic, but once this mechanism was devised, both the monitoring and the plan has been approved also witht he representatives of the regions. So the information comes from the regions themselves, and the data are processed with the regions. So the regions are not an "alter ego" wrt this system, they contribute in reading and 
interpreting the data.
So let me say that it's inaccurate to talk about a confrontation with the regions: the regions are integral to this, and at this time, in terms of accountability, these indicators and parameters and mechanism must be publicly accessible, so if anything, a confrontation has to take place with the scientific community and citizens.
The Minister of Health didn't reserve the political right of "contracting" with the regions. We're talking about the citizens' good here. We can't allow, after building such an airtight system, political evaluations to change the cards. We also have a formal opinion by the regions: they said it's good to have a national system but it's also good to have region-specific details.
We cannot negotiate on the health of our citizens. The Minister of Health won't do that, and I expect the regional governments also not to do that.
[Stream lost]
[...] the recommendation to avoid visiting relatives who don't live with you, because that is a circumstance where contagion happens.
So aside from the very stringent ban in the areas of highest risk, there is always the recommendation, even in the yellow areas, to avoid going to other households.

Q: When will self-certifications be necessary, if at all? And about the "relief" decree, is the number 1, 2 billion euros? And this mini-lockdown, this localized lockdown, can it have effects on the national GDP?
A: Many questions. About self-certifications, they are necessary to motivate any movement in red areas to state the reasons, and similarly for movement between regions and municipalities. In cases when there is only a recommendation, there is no need for a certification, but we have faith that recommendations will be respected, too.
About the relief, I cannot state a number now, because the Ministry of Economy is working on it right now, but there will be an adequate amount, and it will probably be around 1.5 or 2 billion. But in the government we are determined to face this hard battle while being ready to provide anything that is needed, so in case there will be a need for more resources, we will have to go to Parliament with a sense of responsibility and propose further relief.
At this time, though, we believe we have already taken care of things. We will also have to consider parental leaves from work, because of schooling happening remotely.
About the GDP, the latest estimate about public debt came out with nearly zero interest rate. This means that the markets believe in what we are doing and are trusting us. That is an important signal. I don't have a crystal ball on whether we'll have to revise our estimates... but if we can face this new phase, and if these measures allow us to contain contagion, I think it is only fair to have some relief measures. We must adjust and prepare for the 
difficult situation.
Some people tell me I'm a pessimist: but I'm not thinking about a Christmas with huge parties, but if we get there with a margin of safety, the economy will be less depressed.

Q: I have several questions too. You talked about monitoring, which is the starting point for classifying territories: is the monitoring scheme that has been adopted today the same as the one from earlier in October? President of Lombardy Fontana was contesting this.
About school, that is maybe the last "hook" for families to grab on normalcy. Do you think remote schooling from the second year of middle school onward will be the ultimate limit, or may it change further down?
[...]
A: As to the first question, it's clear that the Minister of Health adopted an ordnance a few hours ago that was up to date with the results of monitoring. I'm not a scientist, and Prof. Brusaferro may explain this better, but from what I've understood, the monitoring doesn't look at data coming from yesterday or this week, it has to be related to the previous week... So, if any region will provide an information flow that changes the risk area, we will 
consider it, but if data changes, that doesn't mean the risk area will change immediately: the data must stabilize, for at least 14 days.
It's a mechanism that requires a lot of responsibility from the regional healthcare departments, which must feed data into this system, in their own interest, for an accurate monitoring. But the system looks at a trend that must stabilize.
About school, you invite me to share a consideration, which I also get from a strong petition that I got from Parliament, and which the government shares: schools must be a priority, and among those measures, for instance making some students in higher-order schools use remote learning, well, this is something the government feels pain having to enforce, and we really want to have in-person teaching as soon as possible.
About the question on opposition: on Monday in Parliament we had some sign of news. You will have noticed that the majority forces voted for some proposals from the opposition forces, and we voted for something proposed by a League politician almost with unanimity.
This is part of my intention to find a better way to have constant dialogue with Parliament and the opposition. The opposition have chosen to refuse a table with us, which I've avoided calling a cabinet, because debate will always be available when you want to take part in it, and it's not a matter of sharing responsibilities (the government is taking all responsibility). So there is a full distinction of roles between majority and opposition, but we 
feel the need, during such a serious challenge for this country, to at least share information and try to involve people.
In the end, it's up to the opposition whether or not to take up this proposal. But the proposal will stay there.
That is all? Thank you everyone, and good evening.
