This speech was broadcast live on public TV and at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9JztWZNiUKM




Good evening. Yesterday we approved the decree that starting Monday May 18 will let us get fully into phase 2.
We also finished the decree with the norms to actuate this new law. Let's face this phase 2 with the will to start again, but cautiously.
The data from the epidemiological curve are encouraging: they confirm that the collective effort done until now has produced the desired result.
The number of sick, infected, deceased went down, and the number of recoveries went up. We enhanced our hospital structures, we have new ICU and sub-ICU beds.
We also enhanced testing with swabs and with antibody tests. We are also about to trial the Immuni app.
Ultimately, we are in the condition to cross and face this phase 2 with confidence but also with sense of responsibility.
In this new phase it will be as important as in phase 1 to discuss with the regions and all the local authorities. They will also have to take their own responsibilities.
We set up a national monitoring plan, based on information streams that will need to be provided by the regions on a daily basis, timely and specific: this will let us keep the curve under control, and in case of need, we will be able to introduce restrictive measures that will be very specific to particular cases and locations.
The regions will also cooperate with us to enforce distancing in all social and economic activities. This is why we already involved them and they created protocols that will, together with the national guidelines, guarantee safety conditions during all the activities we'll perform in phase 2.
We're facing a calculated risk, in the knowledge, and I will say this very honestly, that the curve may go up again.
Look, our principles remain the same: they are our values, first of all defending life and health of our citizens, they are non-negotiable values, but we must decline them differently during phase 2.
We are facing this risk and we must accept it, or we will never be able to start again: we'd have to wait for the time of discovery and distribution of the vaccine, and we can't afford that, we'd end up with a devastated productive and social context.
Now I will describe the main content of the new decree: from Monday on, we will be able to move within individual regions without limitations, so, no more self-certifications. This means being able to go outside without having to explain and justify the reasons for moving. You will be able to go anywhere: to a shop, to the mountains, to the lakes, to the sea.
Social life can begin again too, meeting friends... What remains, naturally, is the ban from leaving your home if you're positive to the virus and placed into quarantine; there are also still limitations for anyone with symptoms similar to COVID-19, who will have to stay home.
A ban against gathering in public places also remains. In this phase we will still have to respect the 1-meter distance, and in any case we recommend to always have a face mask with you, which is compulsory in some specific places, and in any case we recommend always wearing it indoors, and also outdoors in like a crowded street where you may not be able to respect safe distances.
Movement between regions will be allowed for the existing reasons: work needs, absolute urgency, and health reasons. These inter-regional movements will remain limited until June 3.
When we reach that time, we will evaluate the data with our experts, and maybe if things go well, we will be able to move across Italy, without limitations.
Again starting on June 3 it will be possible to move within the European Union without compulsory quarantine when entering Italy. This will create the premises for favoring a restart of tourism, too.
As to economic and social activities, starting on May 18, all shops will re-open, as well as all of the services for personal care, such as hairdressers, barbers... we're also reopening restaurants, cafes, pizzerias, icecream sellers, bakeries, pub... all as long as regions ensure that the curve stays under control, and adopt safety protocols.
The same is true for beaches. Religious celebrations will also resume: we worked hard with CEI, with the Catholic Church and other religious denominations. Obviously, we will have to respect measures against contagions contained in specific protocols.
It will also be possible again to have team sports training, so that includes soccer. Museums will re-open, too, while still respecting safety rules.
Starting on May 25, gyms, swimming pools, sport centers will re-open.
On June 15 theaters, cinemas will re-open, and our children will be offered various recreational activities, and here I must thank again the local authorities which cooperated usefully in elaborating this choice of offers.
In this case, too, regions will be free to make these measures wider, or narrower.
All commercial activities will have to respect guidelines and protocols that will be true for the owners, the workers, and the customers. Everyone will need to pay attention and be cautious, and this is particularly true for those regions, and I'm thinking of Lombardy, which are fighting the hardest battle.
It is in a moderate risk zone, it's still exhibiting a high level of saturation of ICU, despite a decrease.
We also created specific measures for people will disabilities, favoring, obviously, the availability of caretakers.
We are re-opening economic activities gradually, cautiously. I am aware that, for some sectors, "re-opening" will not mean economic growth and full business again: economic difficulties and social unease will not disappear suddenly once, say, shops and restaurants are re-opened, or professional activities.
In the past few days I've also read, also met signs on the closed shops: "Without aid, we won't be able to re-open". I received many letters. I am aware that the "restart" decree, despite a considerable number of €55 billion, won't be the solution of all economical and social problems we're going through... but we're giving a hand to those who need to start again: let's think of those with a net gain up to 5 million euro, who are offered €2000 up to €40000 in tax cuts.
With this maneuver we're creating a bridge, to face the hit, the impact of this crisis. We introduced important measures to build our future, such as for school, university, research.
This is a very grave emergency, that is taking a toll on all of us, taking a lot of economical, physical and even moral energies... but this is not the time to take a breath, we cannot afford to stop. We must run, now more than ever, and let our economy run.
In the next hour we'll relentlessly work on the decree on simplifications, and at the same time, I'll work on the European plan for the new financial instruments during this emergency.
With the decree on simplifications, the goal is clear: making some passages of administrative proceeding easier and more transparent, so as to accelerate growth, at zero cost.
Immediately after that, we'll start planning longer-term interventions, investing on the Italy that we want: a greener, more digital, more inclusive Italy.
Thank you.

[Questions followed]
