We are not in a condition to release any of the restrictive measures.
We're in close contact with the scientific committee, who tell us they are starting to see positive effects, but we are not in a condition to change things.
Hence I am signing a new emergency laws, which extends the current laws, until at least April 13.
If we stopped respecting the rules all the efforts done until now would be in vain; since that would be doubly terrible, we are all invited to respect the measures.
There is a small minority of people who do not respect the rules. We have very heavy fines because we cannot allow irresponsibility of a minority to endanger everyone.
I want to thank and protect doctors, 67 of which have died so far. We owe them to reduce the risk.
I am sorry that this extension of the laws happens around Easter, which we all wish to share together... but with much displeasure we'll have to keep these restrictions even during these holidays.
This further effort will let us start to evaluate future projections and to plan an easing of the restrictive measures, but I can't say "It'll be on April 14". We'll have to evaluate the curves.
"Phase 2" will entail living "with" the virus, adopting measures that slowly ease the restritions, and then eventually "phase 3" will allow restoring our normal activity, and rebuilding.
Thanks for your attention, any questions?



Q: you're continuing your activity of international "pressing", for what the EU should do, hopefully they do something... what we want is "Corona bonds", but are you ruling out the possibility that a state-rescuing fund like the European Stability Mechanism may be available?
A: I've been very clear with my European colleagues. since debate and discussion was on the EMS, i think and i'll repeat that instrument is absolutely not suited for this emergency. it was created for different purposes.
So i told the european heads of state: do not propose this again, because it is no use for my country. that said, if it can be changed with very different rules, and become just one measure among various ones, and the funds will be accessible to all countries unconditionally, then it can be one tool
we need something that will let us say "Europe is there, Europe is responding with one voice and showing it is a union of states that can get together against a common enemy."
Q: the primacy of politics compared to science's request to continue with restrictive measures, this dual relationship that risks becoming a conflict, can you tell us something about this? can you also tell us about the rumors that this new emergency law restrict sports activities for professionals?
A: your question was cut off when you talked about athletes...? okay, you asked several questions... can you repeat the first one...? okay, clear. and then children.
The first: what is the relationship between politics and sciene? i think a political decision must be based on scientific evidence. that is the base. but politicians must take their own responsibility: we don't follow scientific committee evaluations to the letter: *based* on them, we create recommendations. politics is facing an invisible and unknown enemy that politics isn't used to face, but scientists themselves are facing the same, and they have difficulties updating their own information and evaluations.
That said, there are scientific recommendations, but then politics has a different viewpoint: why? because we must balance all interests. it's possible that a scientist will keep the epidemiological aspect exclusively; on the other hand, i must keep all aspects in mind, and constitutional principles.
The constitution spells out fundamental rights of people, some of which are now in conflict with each other. the decider must interpret, based on scientific data, the community's needs.
We chose to start from the basis that our constitution primarily focus on preserving health: so that is our primary goal, and then we also try to do good for economy etc.
As to the second question, there is a small change in our emergency law: we suspend training for professional athletes, in order to stop sporting societies to "demand" that athletes do work. it is no longer allowed to have training sessions in groups. athletes can still train individually.
as to the third question about children: we have not at all authorized a "strolling hour". we simply said that when there are minors, when a parent goes to buy groceries for example, children can go with their parents. but this doesn't mean you can have strolls.
Q: do you think it will be possible to allow people who are recovered or asymptomatic to go back to work activities? under which timelines?
A: we still have the system we had before, and nothing is changing. we are evaluating the possibility of how to "recover" those who are recovered, in terms of actual work and social life, but for the time being nothing changes.
All journalists and citizens, thanks for listening.
