Italy PM Giuseppe Conte announces re-opening of some work activities on April 26, scheduled to begin May 4: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BuwooHHEwwI




Thanks to the sacrifices we've done so far we've been able to contain diffusion of the pandemic.
This is a huge result considering in the acute phase there were moments where it seemed out of control.
You all showed, north and south, strength, courage and sense of community.
Now "phase 2" will start, and we must understand that there is definitely a risk of cases going up again.
We must face this with method and rigor. It will be even more essential to respect social distancing.
If you love Italy you must avoid risking infections: you must respect distances of at least one meter, and that includes your relatives.
Keep in mind that scientists and experts tell us that at least 1 infected out of 4 happens within families.
We all want the country to re-open, but the only way to live with this virus is to avoid getting sick, and respecting social distancing.
If we don't respect these precautions, the curve will spike and may go out of control. We will lose more people, and we will have irreversible damage to our economy.
The government has a specific task in this phase: we must monitor the curve and do surveillance so as to make the curve not go up, and we must intervene rapidly in any cluster where the curve spikes up again.
We have set up a mechanism to keep the curve out of control, and I will tell you about it in a moment.
The next few months will have a very complex challenge for us to face. After many weeks of deprivation, I realize most of you want a relaxing of the restriction.
So we could take this new phase negatively: experience rage, against our family, against politicians, the government, the press... there are many options.
Or, we could make a difference choice: remove rage and resentment, and think about what each of us can do, the tasks each of us could perform.
In the next few weeks, in the next months, we must start rebuilding the country.
Let me assure you that the government will play its part. Where will be a time of reforms, and we will need to radically change all the wrong things in our country, and there weve been many wrong things for a long time.
We'll keep fighting in Europe, but also within Italy, to change all the things that aren't working.
Our plan will be put in place on May 4, but I am telling you now about it as you need to prepare and understand it.
I must thank our task force, Colao and the scientific committee.
In living with this virus, we'll have to adopt PPEs, and to this end, we asked Commissioner Arcuri to cap market prices of masks.
We don't want to see speculation on the market for this.
The government will also remove VAT [on masks?] in a coming lew.
In the latest European Council, we made a step ahead that seemed impossible just one week ago: recovery funds, Europe affirmed that the reaction to this pandemic must be quick and bold.
The initiatives that EU institutions had already taken is being enriched with this new tool, which will allow various countries, among which unfortunately Italy, to rebuild in solidarity.
It cannot be denied that if Italy had not stated some conditions from the start, we would never have obtained this result, which is a historic and fundamental result.
We must all be proud, as it was teamwork, and Italy as a whole solicited this response, and obtained it.
I am just the tip of the iceberg, but I can assure you that if we hadn't given this show of pride and character in Europe, I don't think I would have obtained this result.
We must then translate the political principle that was stated into a confirmation in terms of technical work, which will mean giving economic balance to this tool, avoid creating more debt, and most importantly, offer this aid immediately to the affected countries.
Before showing you the content of the law, I want to say we're working on economic measures: I know some of you are still unsatisfied, and we are aware of that, but the effort was extraordinary: INPS has taken 5000 additional requests for basic income in the past few months, 237000 sick leaves for families...
Some are still waiting, there are delays, for which I personally apologize.
But let me remind you it's 11000 requests, and usually this amount of requests would be processed in 5 years. Much of it has been handled in one month now instead.
The contribution of regions will be fundamental: some of them must hasten in providing their information, some have only provided it partially.
And then companies: this countries won't restart its engine without focusing on companies. The new 55 billion law provides more funds to the most vulnerable worker categories, and those who already got a 600 euro bonus may have it renewed without even requesting it, with just a click.
In the next law we'll also be giving more aid to companies, a powerful aid, as our goal is not to have more people on welfare, but more people employed.
There will be direct funding of various types of companies, including small companies, and sectors that were hit hardest like tourism, which will not be able to recover from the damage they had and the stigma.
This sector is important for our GDP and it will certainly need economic aid from the government.
In parallel, we are preparing a law that I call "unlock the country": internationally, and in Europe, we are being watched, with esteem for the measures we have adopted, and I trust this will be one of them.
I trust that Italy can be admired during the coming phase too.
But as to the new measures since May 4, until May 18:
We will generally confirm the measures about social distancing and movement.
It will still only be possible to move within your region for valid reasons, like work and health.
We are only adding the possibility for specific movements to meet relatives.
We want to allow visiting family, but please pay attention, these must be done while respecting distances, using masks, and gatherings will still be banned. We are not allowing private parties or family reunions.
It is still forbidden to all people to move using public or private transport to a different region than the one they are currently in.
The exceptions are work, urgent needs, or health. Plus, we are allowing to go back to one's own domicile.
Now, wnyone who has fever higher than 37.5°C MUST stay at home: this is no longer a recommendation, they MUST stay at home and tell their GP.
Mayors can also temporarily close any areas where it does not seem possible to enforce the limitations.
We are allowing access to parks but only if measures are adopted to limit entry, and mayors can close these areas where this cannot be enforced.
About sports and physical activities: so far it has only been possible to have that in the vicinity of one's own domicile. Now it will be possible to move further away, but there will be a requirement to stay 2m from each other or 1m depending on the type of activity.
It will also be allowed to train professional athletes. This, again, will only be allowed while respecting the rules, and with no gathering, closed doors.
As to funerals, there has been a debate with the scientific committee. It has pained everyone, including me, to see so many deaths without even any ceremonies.
We will now allow funerals, ideally only outdoors, and with the presence of 15 people at most.
I also want to thank CEI and all people with religious sensibilities: we are talking about a fundamental right here, freedom of religion, and I understand how painful this is for many, but we must continue discussing with the scientific committee, and I hope we can allow more religious ceremonies in the future.
After May 4, takeaway restaurants will be able to open again. But please, nobody think there can be a gathering in front of bars and restaurants. You will have to queue, respect distances, and enter one at a time. Food will have to be consumed away, not close to the restaurant.
We are re-opening: manufacture, construction, and wholesale commerce needed for manufacture and construction.
This is an important step, but we are doing it in a well-articulated way. This re-opening can only happen if the affected companies respect safety protocols rigorously. We have signed a policy on April 24, and I want to thank the Unions and other organizations that subscribed this policy. So I'm telling companies, read this protocol immediately, because you will be allowed, even before May 4, to have activities to make your workplace comfort to these policies.
Another critical thing is the movement of workers. So, public transport agencies must get ready to ensure respect of the safety policies.
And lastly we have a security protocol to ensure worker safety on construction sites.
With this set of rigorous protocols, we are close to relaxing the lockdown. But we want to keep the situation under control, and we have disposed a mechanism for the regions to cooperate with us in a very organized way, and inform us on a daily basis, constantly, about the curves in their areas, and they must highlight any critical issues.
Only under these conditions will the scientific committee be able to do its monitoring work.
We have parameters that the committee has determined that will immediately cause further lockdowns in limited areas.
From this point of view, I gave the salient details of the new measures. I just want to also announce that the government has planned some details that are still under discussion. We plan to re-open shops in the future, which is an accessory activity to manufacturing.
So, May 4 will have wholesale commerce re-opening, but on May 18 we will also allow individual shops to open.
On June 1 we plan to gradually re-open bars, restaurants, hairdresses, massage centers, and personal care activities like that. Of course some of these activities involve close contact with people, so we are taking some more days to decide what precautions will have to be applied.
We'll do what we can to also intervene on other activities, that I won't list in detail now, but think of beaches too... we want to allow a well-structured, cautious planning for the next holiday season.
I think I've said all I had to say. Let's move on to questions now.





Q: We're entering "phase 2", finally. You told us about the three phases, and now, with all the unknowns and precautions, we'll inevitably start talking and hoping in a "phase 3". I wonder what the criteria will be to reach that: zero contagion? for how long?
A: Look, one phase at a time. For phase 3, to have no contagion we must absolutely have a vaccine or therapeutics. That cannot be planned now. We can only plan for phase 2, re-open the country safely, and the the duration of "living with" the virus depends not only on us but also on the scientific community, and for now they are unable to tell us when we'll leave the emergency for good.
Q: I'll stay on "phase 2". In light of the fact many parents will go back to work but schools remain closed, won't many parents have huge issues? We know there are benefits, but they are not enough for many families, and we also can't count on grandparents, as they are the ones most at risk.
A: You want me to talk about school... it's an important topic, but I must say, we must expect schools to remain closed for the rest of the school year. We have talked about this with the scientific committee. It's very complicated to allow the right to education while protecting our health. All of our experts are telling us that if we re-opened schools, we'd have to expect a second wave in one or two weeks.
In addition, our school personnel has, on average, one of the highest ages in Europe. This would entail a risk that is not the kind of calculated risk we're aiming for.
The Minister of Education is working to resume school activities in September as best as possible.
Remote teaching is working well, on average.
Some of the things that must be decided quickly are state exams: we have decided to allow state exams in person.
The government is also taking responsibility for a situation that has been going on for years: we are opening up for hiring 24000 teachers. This is vital to enhance our teaching offer. There are some doubts and perplexities by some, but I want to urge ourselves not to miss this chance.
The exam we have envisioned is very accessible and doesn't create high health risks. If we gave this up, we'd lose many potential new teachers.
As manufacture and construction re-open, there will be more workers going to their workplaces... We will definitely provide baby-sitting bonuses again, which is not the solution, but we'll try to create a solidarity network to aid families.
Q: As to sports activities, individual sports will be allowed on May 4, while team sports will be allowed on May 18... Are there plans for training that respectd social distancing? But in sports like soccer this isn't possible.
But I would also like to ask: in your opinion, would resuming the Series A Championship help send a message that normality is coming back? Or do you think in the current state of mind of Italians, this would not be appreciated?
A: You are asking this question to a soccer fan. Like many Italians, I found it weird at first that the championship might be halted. But I think all of us eventually understood there was no other possibilities. Minister Spadafora will work closely with our experts and sport associations, to define a way to restart some training, and after that, we will evaluate if the conditions exist to resume championships. Right now we are not able to ensure that.
Q: Sorry for the audio earlier. About self-certification: will they still be needed when moving between municipalities? And about going back to one's own domicile, will that also be allowed across regions? And, you know there has been intense debate within the majority in parliament about EU aid; are you going to propose a vote on the whole "package"?
A: We will allow people to go back to their homes regardless of which borders they cross. As to the Parliament vote, I will inform Parliament shortly on what is decided on an EU level, and then we will see if Parliament expresses itself with a resolution... What I'd like to ensure, if you were thinking about the EMS, if even that will be involved, you can be sure it will go through Parliament.
As to the question on self-certification: I've felt sorry, and I've followed the ironic memes on social media, I understand that these forms have been modified many times... but it's clear that as long as movement is limited, we cannot abandon this criterion: it's a simple instrument where you can declare where you are going and why. Until movement can only be allowed for specific regions, this will continue.
But this is indicative of the fact that this new law is not a "free for all": many millions of workers will go to their workplaces, and that is not a time when we can tell everyone they can go outside.
We understand this is very restrictive, and that for example, we can no longer only allow physical activity next to one's home... but there still has to be a specific reason for moving outside.
Thank you, and good night.
