This is a translation of Italy's PM April 10 speech at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FheBhq61zTs




We're extending lockdown until May 3.
A difficult but necessary decision, which is my responsibility, but I took it after consulting the Ministers, the scientific committee, the unions...
The scientific committee said the curve is encouraging, and there is evidence the lockdown measures are working. We are receiving important acknowledgements: the European CDC says Italy is being an example to other countries in its measures to safeguard health.
But that's why we cannot give up now: as our experts warned, we may choose all the results we've obtained so far, with more cases and more deaths.
So we must keep our guard up: we must do it now, that Easter is coming, and we'll have to do it for the holidays of April 25 and May 1.
We are all impatient to start again. We wish to restart after May 3, with carefulness, attention, but restart.
For now we must keep respecting the rules, even during these days of holidays. The extension I signed today is also valid for productive activities; we have always put healthcare first, but at the same time we try to weigh in all interests, and we have our socio-economic base at heart.
We wish to relax the measures for all work activities as soon as possible, and restart the engine of our country... but we are not in that condition yet. We must wait.
What I can promise is that, even if before May 3, the circumstances changed, we may act sooner.
There are some small changes concerning work activities: starting on April 14, stationary stores, bookshops, clothing shops for infacts, will be reopened, after many requests.
We are also allowing forestry again, to be able to provide wood as combustible.
The work towards "phase 2" has already started: we cannot expect the virus to disappear completely, and we are already working to resume production activities after the acute phase. When we will have to live "with" the virus, we'll have a group of experts, and security protocols on the workplace.
Our experts will include sociologists, psychologists, job experts, and managers, who will discuss with the scientific committee to have the possibility to modify the normal logic of working, rethink some socio-economic models.
We must take this as a chance to innovate, keeping quality of life also into account.
[Names are being made of experts that will be part of this committee.]
The protocol on workplace safety was already signed in March together with the Unions. That's our "bible" for workplaces, which is being integrated and enhanced by our experts.
The recommendation to all company managers is to take advantage of the remaining time of suspension of work activities to sanitize workplaces, and prepare things to be able to later respect distances and other parts of the protocol.
Employers and employees will decide whether everything can proceed and the economic system start again.
Our goal is to keep R0 below 1. We cannot afford another spike in the curve.
We need expert advice also to change logistics and transportation: we must incentivize transport that avoids crowding.
Europe is facing a situation that was never seen before in peacetimes. 1500 billion euros will be needed for this emergency according to preliminary estimates.
This is one of the worst crisis for Europe and even for the whole planet.
The United States is already allocating more than 2000 billion dollars.
Within the proposals that came yesterday from the EU group, or minister did a great job. But we judge the measures taken as still not sufficient. We must build something more ambitious.
The main battle that Italy must conduct with the EU is for the creation of a fund to share efforts, yes, the famous "eurobonds", which must have firepower in proportion to a war economy; and it must be available NOW, and I'm telling this to all my peers.
If we come late with an economic response, that will not be enough, and we'll depress our economy.
The EU group's proposals also contain provisions for EU-level unemployment aids, for a total of 100 billion already allocated.
The eurobonds are, however, the main tool we need, despite other instruments having been created. The group is also proposing an unconditional credit system, connected to the old EMS.
In Italy we have had a very heated debate, which is legitimate, as a sign of freedom and democracy, and I assure you that the government will find ways and opportunities to inform and discuss with Parliament and the representatives of the people.
It's just as important for this debate to be clear and devoid of inaccuracies: so I must state that the EMS has existed since 2012, it wasn't created or activated "last night", as some declared falsely and inappropriately.
This time I must make names: Matteo Salvini and Giorgia Meloni.
This is not true. This is not acceptable. This government doesn't work in the dark, we are transparent with all italians.
The EU group created NO obligation.
Second things: on request of certain Member States, but NOT of Italy, there has been a proposal for a credit line linked to the EMS but different from the existing ones.
Third, and to be even clearer: Italy signed for NO activation of the EMS, we don't need it, because we believe it is a completely inadequate tool for the emergency we are living.
I made it clear to all my peers in the EU: Italy doesn't want the EMS or consider it adequate. If other States, since we are working in synergy with 8 other States, want a new credit line, then we must also take part to this discussion. But this is what we're fighting for: to have innovative instruments, and we will work with courage and determination to obtain it.
Yesterday something new happened: there is an entire paragraph devoted to our requests on expenses and investments. We are making principled statements, and there is not yet any exact guidelines, but we wrote it in ink for the first time, and other countries have had to agree not just to "explore for the future", but to work now on this new instrument.
It must be immediately applicable and enforceable, but we need the help of all Italian citizens, and this is why I must say that lies weaken us.
I had asked the opposition to share our sense of responsibility, but the falsehoods that have been stated yesterday risk weakening not just me, your PM, but the whole country.
There are 26 more countries, and we must work together, with the Germans, the Dutch, we must show our plans, we must show or dignity and determination for the long term.
If debate continues in this way, we are going to compromise our negotiation abilities.
I will evaluate the EU's response as a whole. I will explain again to the next European Council that the EMS is inadequate and insufficient for what we're living.
If this had been a crisis like the 2008 one, we could have used other instruments, but today we must invent new ones. From this viewpoint, I will NOT sign until I have a range of tools that is adequate to the challenge we are living.
A challenge that concerns all of Europe, not just Italians, and with reason and logic, I trust we will convince everyone that this is the only way for Europe to rise again.
Thank you. I'll take some questions now.
Q: [Inaudible: something about the EMS] ... Salvini is still calling the EMS a trap. And the hypothesis of eurobonds, Mr President, you talked ... the European Council that will take place on April 23... I'm asking if you can give us a date, a deadline.
A: About the EMS, I'll say it again, when we started this negotiation with the EU, many States invoked existing instruments, like the EMS, but I said it immediately: Italy is not interested. Italy is in the vanguard, and particularly suffering, like Spain, but it's obvious that economic depression will concern every Member State.
Some countries that are with us in this battle for building new tools do consider the EMS sufficient, so Italy is accepting discussing an unconditional EMS, hence that battle; but if it is a "trap" like you said, then whoever created this trap must publicly take responsibility.
There was a center-right government, and Meloni was a Minister, that created this "trap". It was voted not by me, I wasn't even in Parliament, so if this is a trap, one must take responsibility for it.
Yesterday we put it in ink that we can activate a completely new line of credit, with no conditions except that they must be used for healthcare, but this is not something Italy asked for; Italy has been more ambitious from the start, and we'll keep working on the "eurobonds".
You say, don't we risk coming too late? Well, you tell me if there is a shortcut. The only way I know is fighting as a people to obtain a result immediately.




Q: [Link broken / inaudible] have there been debates between the Democratic Party and Five Stars?
A: Yes, we had a long discussion, yesterday we meet the delegates from the regions, the mayor and the provinces, so we gathered a lot of material and worked with the relevant Ministers; creating this latest decree was difficult and we had to solve many issues. It wasn't a fight for or against the EMS.
The majority in the government knows that the EMS is not the right solution, for the way it was devised.
So let's not waste important time reasoning about it; sure, there was an update, and we reasoned on the current status, because it is a complicated negotiation. We must be united and compact.
You also asked about a tax on property? There is no concrete proposal and the government doesn't see one on the horizon.
Q: [inaudible] ... is there a message for the medium term, a model for living with the virus, for the people who need to plan in advance, thinking also about tourism in the summer?
A: That is what the expert group is for: to proceed with a plan, it gathers the best practices and the best (re-)organizational models for logistics and transport... We are in a time of suffering, but we are a country with a lot of abilities and resources, so we must work to improve our social, economic and cultural performance. We must rethink the way our lives are organized to start again stronger.
Q: Again on "phase 2", you said that starting on May 3, we hope there will be gradual reopening... of non-essential work activities, like hairdressers, restaurants, laundry services...? Is there also a plan in progress for the tax declarations?
A: Please don't ask me for dates, I cannot be pushed to betting on a specific future, as it's not in the government's style. We are following rational paths for living with the virus, which we must do on expert recommendations, while taking fully responsibility of all political decisions.
So I'm unable to tell you now, but I can say we expect a full reopening of work activities but with very rigorous safety protocols, as we cannot get rid of the virus, and even if we could make it disappear from Italy, there could still be return contagion.
Your colleague talked about tourism: well, think of what that means, it means many people may come from abroad.
That said, we'll work on the next decree quickly, for economic measures to be adopted at the end of April.
We already adopted some measures with the last two decrees. I'm sorry that all these measures we've put on paper don't mean that you are actually receiving money: there are timelines, processes, and we are trying to reduce bureaucracy to the minimum, but unfortunately, there are still waiting times.
We are pushing on everybody relevant, on INPS, on the banks, to make it possible for these money grants to happen as quickly as possible. Please understand that we were not prepared as a centralized state to face an emergency like this, which no one was expecting anywhere.
We currently have more than 4 billion people under restrictive measures, more than 100 countries: it concerns the entire planet, but we must preserve our social and productive system and remove bureaucratic obstacles from it, so that we can restart with positive growth.
Thank you all and an happy Easter to all Italians.
