Italy's PM Giuseppe Conte addressed the nation on Sunday October 18, video at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yx0QO0dm23U

This new ordnance will let us face the new situation to avoid a general lockdown.
The country cannot afford to stop again, which would compromise the whole economy.
The third trimster which just ended shows a higher rise than Spain, France or Germany.
But here are the new rules.
Mayors will be able to close streets and squares after 21:00
All restaurants, bars, and other drinking and eating venues are allowed between 5am and midnight if there is table serving, otherwise only until 18:00
Takeaway is allowed until midnight.
In restaurants, max 6 people per table, and all restaurants will need to show a sign indicating the maximum allowable number of people inside.
No limitation for eating venues in hospitals, airports and motorways.
Schools with continue in person.
High schools including liceo and technical institutes will need to favor remote learning, and in-person lessons will have to start at 9am and sometimes take place in the afternoons.
Contact sports remains banned, but individual sport activity will be allowed, as will professional sports.
Local fairs are are banned, while fairs with a national or international characters are allowed.
In public administration, all meetings will occur remotely unless there are motivated reasons.
We will also increase the ability to do smart working.
There has been intense dialog about gyms. We have contrasting news: very often, safety protocols are respected, but sometimes we get news that they aren't. So, we are giving gyms a week to upgrade protocols; if we will be satisfied with that, there will be no reason to close gyms. Otherwise, next week we will have to suspend activity in gyms and pools.
We know we will impose economical sacrifices to enterpreneurs. The government wants to restore their income. The strategy we are pursuing is not, and cannot be, the same as last Spring.
At first we didn't have enough PPE, nor the ability to do large-scale testing.
During the past months we worked hard, we doubled ICU beds and we increased medical personnel by half.
We started from nothing about masks, but now we are producing 20 million surgical masks per day.
We are among the few countries in the world who provide a surgical mask per student every single day, as well as more than 7 million to hospitals, nursing homes and polices forces.
We are aware that we still have various critical points. We reached 160k tests per day, but we must avoid having hours-long queues to get a test.
We never lowered our guard. We renewed the state of emergency, to continue strengthening our healthcare structures and improve conditions in schools and public buildings.
This new strategy stems from a detailed analysis of the epidemiological situation, as studied by the technical committee.
We must strive to preserve health but also economy, acting in the name of adequateness and proportionality.
Using masks, social distancing and handwashing are still fundamental. Especially in those situations where we often lower guards: like when we meet friends or family, we must have the utmost care.
We'll have to wait a few days to see the results of these new measures. We must continue doing sacrifices until monoclonal therapies and vaccines are available.
We will continue being very careful towards people with disabilities and their families. We will always be close to their needs.
The situation is critical. The government is here, but each one of us will have to do our jobs to get past this difficult moment.

Questions now.

[...]

Q: Should we not re-evaluate using the EU emergency fund?
A: If we take that money, we'll have to introduce new taxes or cuts, because public debt must be kept under control. Besides, for healthcare investments, we allocated 4 billion euros, and then we have the money from the "recovery fund". The emergency fund is not a panacea.
I will add that since the situation, despite the crisis we are facing, is economically positive for us at the moment... But interests on public loans are very low. When we keep this in mind, we must keep in mind we must compare the advantage in terms of interests, which is very low, with the risk of "stigma" of taking the emergency funds.
So I said, if we'll need cash, we will consider the emergency fund. But if this is not the case, then just taking the money just to solve a dispute within public debate makes no sense.
As to ICUs, we will continue distributing equipment to the regions that asked, we still have 1600 available, then everyone will have to do their part at the regional level.
Q: This year's financial law will by necessity have to face the economic crisis. How much do you think will be left for growths? Also, since various workers will have new difficulties, will the fund for individual companies be reinstated?
A: We must prepare to give money to the individuals who will face restrictions, such as eating venues. Some sums will have to be available for the rest of this year.
What we can't afford is giving money generally; it was done during the generalized lockdown, but as I said, the strategy is different now. We must reconcile economy with health, and many international analysts have been surprised by our economic growth. This means we must keep growing, so we must act selectively.
Q: There has been an intense and ample discussion as you said yourself on this new law, but the opposition did not take part. Do you mean to involve them in the coming days?
A: I told the Presidents of the House and Senate, and the leaders of the opposition, that I was about to sign this new law and discuss it with the public. I will be in Parliament during the next week. You see the curve is worrisome, it was urgent to intervene.
The Minister of Health was recently in Parliament, and we'll constantly keep in touch.
Q: Still about Parliament, next week there will be no voting in the House because there is a cluster; do you think there will be issues in the coming months? My second question is, based on data you know, should Italians start booking Christmas holidays, or is it better to wait?
A: One measure that may have a critical impact is that in public administrations, all meetings will have to happen remotely, unless there are motivated reasons to do it in person. Parliament has its own regulations, and I know in the House a new rule has been adopted to consider COVID-positive people as "in a mission", and while it's not part of my prerogatives, clearly we must act at all levels when many people are self-quarantined which can make activities more complex.
About Christmas holidays... well, I cannot make predictions. I can only say: let's respect the rules, let's face this difficult time with trust and eventually we'll be able to resume our desired activities.
Thank you.
