https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VxdbaZk6CoY (on Facebook originally, this is a re-stream)



From the beginning, I choose transparency, sharing.
I choose not to minimize, not to hide reality.
The challenge we're called to face, and the hardest crisis after WW2, I'm sharing with you.
We are called to face images, news that hurt us, that leave a sign that will stay forever in our memory, even when this will be over - we hope soon.
The deaths of so many citizens is a pain that is renewed every day.
These deaths, for our values, are not just numbers, but histories of families that are losing their beloved.
The measures we already adopted require time before they can show some effects.
We are called to respect all of them with patience and with trust.
They are difficult measures, I understand: it's not easy to stay home, to renounce many things, but we have no alternatives.
That's the only way we can help ourselves and the people we love.
Besides, our sacrifice to stay home is minimal if you compare it to the people in the hospitals and other vital places for the country's life.
I'm thinking of doctors, nurses, but also police forces, the armed forces, the people in the Civil Protection, the employees of supermarkets, pharmacists...
Women and men who are not just going to work but are doing, every day, an act of great responsibility for the nation.
They're making an act of love for Italy as a whole.
Today, we decided to take a further step.
The decision we took is to close, on the whole national territory, every production activity, except for those that are absolutely necessary and crucial to guarantee essential services and goods.
We have worked with the unions to determine the most necessary services.
All supermarkets will stay open, as will the shops for food and essentials.
So notice well that we have introduced NO restrictions on opening hours of supermarkets.
There is no reason to create unjustified crowds.
Pharmacies and parapharmacies will also remain open, as will banking and financial services.
We'll continue to provide public transportation.
We'll also allow any activities which are connected to essential ones.
Outside of those, we will only allow remote working.
Plus, production activities that are considered relevant to the national production.
We're slowing down the country's engine, but we're not stopping it.
It's a decision that prepares us to face the most acute phase of contagion.
Today, in particular, we must contain the epidemic as much as possible.
The health emergency is becoming a full-blown economy emergency.
But I am telling to all of you: the state is there, the state is with you.
The government will introduce extraordinary measures to start again.
Our community must hold tight together, like a chain protecting the most important good: life.
If only one ring of that protection barrier failed, it'd expose us to graver dangers.
Those things you can no longer do, which seem a step back today, tomorrow will allow us to restart with more force.
We are giving up our dearest habits; we are doing it because we love Italy, but we do not renounce hope in the future.
United, we will make it.
