This is the most aggressive comprehensive effort to confront a virus in modern history
From the beginning of time nations and people have faced huge challenges, always was, always will be.
It only matters how you respond, and we're responding with the best team in the world.
We've instituted sweeping travel restrictions with China; we declared a public health emergency and issued travel warnings with other countries. Taking early intense action we've seen fewer cases than in Europe.
New clusters were seeded from Europe. To keep new cases from entering our shores, we will be suspending all travel from europe to the US, effective at midnight.
There will be exceptions for americans who [...] for 30 days.
These restrictions will NOT apply to the United Kingdom.
We are monitoring the situation in China and Korea, and will be re-evaluating the situation for a possible early re-opening of flights.
[...]
I signed last week a law to found this. Testing capabilities are expanding rapidly day by day.
For the vast majority of americans, the risk is very low. Healthy young people can expect to recover quickly.
The highest risk is for the elderly.
In particular we are advising nursing homes to suspend visits
My administration is coordinating with communities with the largest outbreaks, and we have issued guidelines for school closures and social distancing and gatherings.
Every community faces different risks so you should follow the guidelines of local officials.
For all americans it is essential to practice good hygiene and take extra precautions: wash your hands, clean often used surfaces, clean your face, and if you're sick, stay home.
To ensure that americans can stay home without financial consequences, i will provide financial relief: the ill, quarantined, or caring for other people with the coronavirus will be taken care of by this relief.
Over the last three years we've had the greatest economy in the world by far. Our banks and financial insistutions are strong.
This economic prosperity gives us the resources to handle any threat coming our ways.
This is not a financial crisis: this is just a temporary moment that we will overcome.
Tonight i am announcing the following additional actions: small business administration can provide capital liquidity to those affected by the coronavirus; loans will be available in affected states and territories; we will tackle disruptions caused by the virus.

[...]

We will defer tax payments...
These actions will provide more than 200 billion of additional liquidity. All americans will also have immediate tax relief.
We are at a very critical time in the fight against the virus. Now we must take the same actions with Europe as we took with China.
I will always put the well-being of americans first.Iif we can reduce chance of infection, which we will, the virus will not have a chance against us.
We have the best economy, the best healthcare, and the most talented researchers in the world.
We must put politics aside, and fight together as one nation and one family.
As history has proven, America will always rise to the challenge and overcome it.
We will heal the sick, care for those in needs, and emerge stronger and more united.
God bless you and God bless america.
